SATSANG READER
Part 1
Brief Biographies of Leading Sadhus and Devotees
of the Swaminarayan Sampradaya

A Textbook of the Satsang Examinations Series: 7

SATSANG READER
Part 1
Brief Biographies of Leading Sadhus and Devotees
of the Swaminarayan Sampradaya

Gujarati Text: Kishore M. Dave
Translation: BAPS Sadhus

Swaminarayan Aksharpith
Ahmedabad

SATSANG READER, PART 1
Brief Biographies of Leading Sadhus and Devotees of the
Swaminarayan Sampradaya
A textbook for the Satsang Examinations curriculum set by
Bochasanwasi Shri Akshar-Purushottam Swaminarayan Sanstha
Inspirer: HH Pramukh Swami Maharaj
Blessings: HH Mahant Swami Maharaj
7th Edition: September 2025
ISBN: 978-81-7526-426-7
Copyright: © Swaminarayan Aksharpith
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced
in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the
publisher, except for brief quotations embodied in reviews and articles.

Published & Printed by
Swaminarayan Aksharpith
Shahibaug, Ahmedabad-4
Gujarat, India
Website: www.baps.org  

Contents
Blessings................................................................................................ vi
Publisher’s Note. ...............................................................................vii
1

Sadguru Brahmanand Swami. ........................................................ 1

2. Sadguru Devanand Swami.............................................................17
3. Sadguru Shukanand Swami. .........................................................23
4. Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar . ..............................................31
5. Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi ......................................................................41
6. Bhaktaraj Jivuba................................................................................51
7. Swami Nirgundasji. .........................................................................57
8. Swami Yagnapriyadasji. .................................................................71
Glossary. ..............................................................................................80

Blessings
The youth movement established and nourished by
Brahmaswarup Yogiji Maharaj has been expanding at a very rapid
pace. To satisfy the aspirations and thirst for knowledge of the youth
joining the movement, and also to enable them to understand
and imbibe the principles of Akshar-Purushottam expounded by
Bhagwan Swaminarayan, the publication division of Shri AksharPurushottam (Swaminarayan) Yuvak Mandal, organized under the
auspices of Bochasanwasi Shri Akshar-Purushottam Sanstha, has
drawn up a plan to bring out a series of books.
These books are intended to systematically impart scholarly
knowledge in a simple language to the children and youth
of the Satsang. It is hoped that this Sanstha – established by
Brahmaswarup Shastriji Maharaj to implement and propagate the
ideals revealed by Bhagwan Swaminarayan – will, through this
activity, teach the ideals and noble traditions of the Sampradaya
and through it, the Sanatan Hindu Dharma.
The aim of this Sanstha is to spread the divine message of
Bhagwan Swaminarayan to all corners of the world. It is planned
to bring out these books in different languages. We hope that
all religious-minded truth seekers of the Sampradaya and those
outside it, will welcome this activity and extend their full support
to it by all possible means, including monetary help.
To encourage children and youths, examinations are held
based on the curriculum as presented in these books. Certificates
are also awarded to successful candidates.
I bless Shri Ishwarcharan Swami, Prof. Rameshbhai Dave,
Kishorebhai Dave, and all others who have assisted in the preparation of these books.
Vasant Panchami 
Shastri Narayanswarupdasji
Vikram Samvat 2028 
(Pramukh Swami Maharaj)
(21 January 1972 CE), Atladara 
Jay Swaminarayan
vi | Satsang Reader 1

Publisher’s Note
Parabrahma Purushottam Bhagwan Swaminarayan
manifested on this earth out of compassion and grace. During
his life on earth, he inspired many to attain the highest spiritual
state. The lives of these sadhus, and male and female devotees
serve as an example for all on how to worship God and attain
his divine bliss. Shriji Maharaj’s work has been continued by
the succession of God-realized Sadhus he established. Spiritual
seekers who have associated with them have also attained the
ultimate spiritual bliss.
This publication, Satsang Reader, Part 1: Brief Biographies of
Leading Sadhus and Devotees of the Swaminarayan Sampradaya,
contains the short biographies of a selection of such sadhus
and devotees since the time of Bhagwan Swaminarayan. It is
a translation of the Gujarati book Satsang Vachanmala Part 1.
This book has been designed to serve as part of the curriculum
for the Satsang Examinations. More specifically, it is one of the
textbooks for the second level examination, Satsang Pravesh.
It is our earnest prayer that all satsangis study this book
carefully, pass the examinations with flying colours, and above
all, derive immense spiritual benefits and please Bhagwan
Swaminarayan and the guru parampara.
- Swaminarayan Aksharpith

Publisher’s Note | vii

Prayer

Ame sau Swāminā bālak, marishu Swāmine māte;
Ame sau Shrijitanā yuvak, ladishu Shrijine māte...
Nathi dartā nathi kartā, amārā jānani parvā;
Amāre dar nathi koino, ame janmyā chhie marvā...Ame 1
Ame ā yagna ārambhyo, balidāno ame daishu;
Amārā Akshar-Purushottam, Gunātit gnānane gāishu...Ame 2
Ame sau Shrijitanā putro, Akshare vās amāro chhe;
Svadharmi bhasma choli to, amāre kshobh shāno chhe...Ame 3
Juo sau Motinā Swāmi, na rākhi kāi te khāmi;
Pragat Purushottam pāmi, malyā Gunātit Swāmi...Ame 4
Meaning: We are all children of Swami; we will die for Swami. We are all
youths of Shriji [Maharaj]; we will fight for Shriji [Maharaj].
We are not afraid; we do not worry about our own lives. We do not fear
anyone; for we are born to die.
We have begun this sacred endeavour (yagna), and we will offer any sacrifice.
We will sing the glory of Akshar-Purushottam and the knowledge of Gunatit.
We are all the children of Shriji [Maharaj]; Akshar is our abode. We are
dedicated to our dharma; we have no sorrows whatsoever.
Everyone see Motibhai’s Swami [Shastriji Maharaj]; he has left no
shortcomings. We have attained the manifest (pragat) Purushottam and
Gunatit[anand] Swami.

Sadguru Brahmanand Swami

1. Sadguru Brahmanand Swami
The Royal Court of Shirohi was filled to capacity. At the
Maharaja’s behest, the young poet, Ladudanji, began to recite
several poems he had created himself. The child’s powerful and
eloquent delivery captivated the audience. As the recital came
to an end, applause thundered throughout the hall.
As the crowd whispered in amazement, the Maharaja
thought to himself, “How great it would be if the brilliance of
this invaluable jewel of our state were to spread everywhere!”
Soon after, through a dream, God inspired the poet’s mother
and father, Laluba and Shambhudanji, with the same thought.
When the Maharaja approached them with the idea of having
Ladudanji study further, they readily agreed. Thus, with a
Brahmin as his companion and with the blessings of all, Ladudanji
set out to learn Pingal Shastra, the science of poetry, in Bhuj.
Born on 8 February 1772 ce (Vasant Panchami – Maha sud
5, Samvat 1828) , in the village of Khan in the Shirohi region
of present-day Rajasthan, Ladudanji’s natural poetic talent was
apparent from a young age. His abilities developed rapidly with
his studies in Bhuj, where he stayed as a guest of the Rao, King
of Kutch, and studied under the guidance of guru Abhaydanji.
After ten years of rigorous study, Ladudanji had become an
expert in Pingal and other poetic sciences. His brilliance had
earned him the respect of Abhaydanji.
However, the Rao still wanted to test Ladudanji’s knowledge,
so he arranged for Ladudanji to perform before the Royal Court.
The young man passed the Rao’s test with flying colours,
earning the pleasure of the Rao and his court. In fact, so pleased
was the Rao that he rewarded Ladudanji handsomely and
conferred on him the titles of Rajkaviratna, Pingal-vidyacharya,
Mahamahopadhyaya, Mahakavishvar Shatavdhani and others.
The king further requested Ladudanji to permanently serve the
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 1

state as the royal poet. Ladudanji, however, longed to return
to his hometown. He thus bade the Rao farewell, forever
remembering his debt.
On his way back to Khan, Ladudanji stopped in the town
of Dhamadka in Kutch to learn Sanskrit and music from the
renowned pandit Bhattacharya. It was during his time in
Dhamadka that Ladudanji met Sadguru Ramanand Swami and
received his blessings for the first time.
After completing his studies with Pandit Bhattacharya,
Ladudanji continued on and was received with great honour in
the states of Dhrangadhra, Jamnagar, Dwarka and Junagadh.
In each of these places, Ladudanji’s performances won over his
patrons, who presented him precious gifts as a sign of honour
and appreciation.
However, while performing before King Vakhatsinh and the
Royal Court of Bhavnagar, Ladudanji exceeded even his own
limits. The king was so pleased with Ladudanji’s performance
that he called for the royal goldsmith and instructed him to
adorn the poet with gold ornaments.
As the goldsmith approached Ladudanji to take the necessary
measurements, the poet was surprised to see a distinctive tilak
mark of sandalwood paste and a large round chandlo of vermilion
on the goldsmith’s forehead.
Just as Ladudanji began to inquire about the tilak-chandlo,
the king interrupted. “I have a dilemma that you have to solve,”
he said, looking at Ladudanji. “In my kingdom, there is a village
called Gadhada. An individual by the name of Swaminarayan
has come to this village. The Kathis believe him to be God. To
me, it all sounds like a hoax. I would like you to please go there
yourself and find out the truth.”
Being young and full of pride of his skills and fame, Ladudanji,
along with his maternal uncle, immediately left for Gadhada
to expose Swaminarayan. But as Ladudanji made his way to
2 | Satsang Reader 1

Gadhada, he began to doubt himself. He began wondering,
“What if Swaminarayan is actually God. If he really is, then he
should fulfil my wishes,” He decided to test Swaminarayan with
four wishes:
“May he place the rose garland he is wearing around my
neck and call me by my name.”
“May he show me the 16 divine signs on his feet.”
“Let him May he introduce me by relaying my life story.”
“May he be reading from the Bhagvat shastra wrapped in
a black cloth.”
With such thoughts racing through his mind, Ladudanji
entered Gadhada. Immediately he experienced absolute peace
and calm. At that time, Bhagwan Swaminarayan was sitting
in an assembly of sadhus and devotees under the neem tree in
Dada Khachar’s darbar. A garland of roses adorned his neck. In
front of him lay the Bhagvat, wrapped in a black cloth.
As Ladudanji entered the darbar, Shriji Maharaj called him by
his name and welcomed him by placing the rose garland he was
wearing around Ladudanji’s neck. He then relayed the poet’s
life story before revealing the 16 signs on his feet.
Maharaj had fulfilled each and every one of Ladudanji’s
wishes. The poet’s happiness knew no bounds. As his heart
swelled with joy, he spontaneously composed and sang a kirtan:
“Dhanya ãjni ghadi re, dhanya ãjni ghadi,
Me nirakhyã Sahajãnand, dhanya ãjni ghadi, Dhanya...
Gnãn-kuchi guru gamase, gayã tãlã ughadi,
Lãdu Sahajãnand nihãltã, thari ãnkhadi re, Dhanya...”
Meaning:
“Blessed is this moment, indeed blessed is this moment.
Yes, he who has seen Swami Sahajanand
Blessed is the moment.
The key to knowledge he has got from his guru
The doors of liberation have been opened.
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 3

Ladu has seen Sahajanand,
And his eyes are filled with supreme joy.”
The doors of the poet’s heart were opened, and as his eyes
met with Maharaj’s, Ladudanji went into samadhi. Frightened
on seeing the still body of his nephew, the poet’s uncle began to
rebuke Maharaj. However, he, too, was soon swept into samadhi
as the assembled devotees marvelled at the sight before them.
Divine light, such that the poet had never seen before, spread all
around, and within it stood Maharaj’s beautiful murti, surrounded
by all the avatars, who were singing his praises with folded hands.
With this divine darshan fixed in the poet’s eyes, tears of joy
flowed and his heart swelled with emotion. On awakening from
samadhi he surrendered to Maharaj, falling at Maharaj’s feet and
praying that he be forever blessed with devotion.
Just as a doll made of salt dissolves as it ventures to fathom
the depth of the oceans, Ladudanji, who had come to prove
Maharaj was a hoax, ended up with Maharaj’s murti installed
in his heart. Ladudanji ceased being a court poet. He was now
a devotee of Bhagwan Swaminarayan.
c c c

After a few days, Maharaj requested Ladudanji to reason
with Dada Khachar’s sisters. He explained that Dada’s sisters,
Laduba and Jivuba, were married, yet they lived according to
the celibate rules of sadhus. Maharaj further added that their
behaviour reflected badly on him. With these words, Maharaj
asked Ladudanji to go and persuade both sisters to return to
the homes of their in-laws and live as normal householders.
Jivuba and Laduba both had a vow not to look at men
other than Maharaj. So, when Ladudanji went to meet them,
he arranged for a curtain to be placed between the sisters and
himself. After the curtain was arranged, Ladudanji began to
explain to them that it was their responsibility as lay people to
observe their marriage duties.
4 | Satsang Reader 1

The sisters listened to the poet calmly. After hearing him
out, they responded, “The body appears charming because of
the atma (soul) within. It is the soul that makes the body move,
walk and talk. Without the soul, the body has no value.”
The sisters continued, “You adorn yourself with beautiful
clothes and ornaments. So, if someone is attracted towards you
because of your looks, who will be responsible for that sin? It
will be none other than you. Therefore, give up your flashy
lifestyle and lead a virtuous life, a life full of bhakti.”
Ladudanji was deeply touched by the sisters’ insightful words
and immediately went to Maharaj, and gave up his rich clothes
and ornaments. He then asked Maharaj to initiate him as a sadhu.
Maharaj soon ordained him into the sadhu-fold and gave him
the name ‘Shrirangdas’. However, his name soon changed to
Brahmanand, literally meaning divine joy, because his cheerful
nature and poetic skills never failed to bring a smile to Maharaj’s
face.
c c c

Leaving Ladudanji behind in Gadhada, the poet’s uncle
soon returned to Khan and related to his family all that had
transpired. After hearing what Ladudanji had done, the family
decided to go to Gadhada to persuade him to return home.
However, once they arrived in Gadhada, Brahmanand Swami
explained Maharaj’s unparalleled greatness to them. He told
them that he had found God and so it was his final decision to
renounce the world in order to fulfil his purpose in life.
To his fiancé, who had also come to Gadhada with the family,
he composed a kirtan and had it conveyed to her. The kirtan’s
words were:
“Re sagpana Harivarnu sãchu,
biju sarve kshan-bhangur kãchu.”
Meaning, “The only true relationship is that with God; all
else is momentary and fragile.”
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 5

Brahmanand Swami’s family members continued to beg him
to change his mind. However, he remained determined. His
decision was firm and irrevocable.
Despite all this, and to test Brahmanand Swami’s resolve,
Maharaj directed him to return home. Taken by surprise,
Brahmanand Swami felt as if lightning had struck him and he
suddenly fainted.
Everyone’s hearts melted on seeing Brahmanand Swami’s
sincere and deep attachment to Maharaj.
His mother, however, still had one worry: Who would now
give Ladudanji the love that she had once given him? Reading
her thoughts, Maharaj promised her that he himself would act as
Brahmanand Swami’s mother and offer him love and affection. He
then presented her a sanctified cloth and pleased the entire family.
Having accepted Brahmanand Swami’s decision and
appreciating his firm faith in Maharaj, the family returned to
Rajasthan.
c c c

The greatest of scholars were impressed by Brahmanand
Swami’s outstanding personality, vast knowledge and powerful
speaking skills. Under his influence, many of them came to
accept Maharaj’s refuge.
Brahmanand Swami often accompanied Maharaj in his
travels from village to village. Yet, at Maharaj’s request, he once
went to Surat to undertake further studies in Sanskrit. There,
he studied in the ashram of Munibawa, a profound scholar of
Sanskrit and an adherent of the Vedanta philosophy.
Due to his profound scholarship, Munibawa was a favourite
of the state. However, by nature, he was arrogant. Still,
Brahmanand Swami, with his sheer humility and brilliant
intellect, won him over. During his time with Munibawa, not
only did Brahmanand Swami become an expert in Sanskrit,
but he also explained to Munibawa the significance of atma and
6 | Satsang Reader 1

Paramatma as well as the greatness of Bhagwan Swaminarayan.
Brahmanand Swami’s words changed Munibawa, who
experienced the light of God in his words. Munibawa now
yearned for Maharaj’s darshan.
When the opportunity presented itself, Munibawa
accompanied Brahmanand Swami to Gadhada, anxious to
meet Maharaj. However, as soon as the two reached Gadhada,
Maharaj was totally indifferent to Munibawa. It was as if
Munibawa was not even worthy of recognition.
“Maharaj,” Muktanand Swami said, drawing his attention.
“Munibawa is here.”
“Who is Munibawa?” Maharaj inquired casually, not even
bothering to look up at the great scholar.
Maharaj’s indifference hurt Munibawa’s ego. Upset, the scholar
left the assembly and prepared to return to Surat. Muktanand
Swami and Brahmanand Swami, however, persuaded him to
stay. They honoured him on the spot and also arranged a grand
reception for him at the darbars of Dada Khachar, Jiva Khachar
and other village chieftains. Jiva Khachar and others also gave
him gifts. Munibawa was greatly pleased by the honours.
The following day, the scholar went to Dada Khachar’s darbar
for the arti of Vasudev-Narayan. As Munibawa entered, he
saw Maharaj standing in the veranda between two pillars with
both his hands stretched wide. Behind him stood his attendant,
Bhaguji, holding a 20 kg cushion, waiting for Maharaj to let
him pass so he could finish arranging his seat for him.
Turning back to look at Bhaguji, Maharaj took the enormous
cushion from his hands and then spun it on his finger before
tossing it towards the neem tree, where his seat was arranged.
The cushion landed on Maharaj’s seat exactly in the correct
position.
Munibawa was amazed that Maharaj was able to lift such
a heavy pillow with just one finger, spin it and throw it so
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 7

precisely. He saw in Maharaj the divine power of Shri Krishna
Bhagwan, who had propped up Mount Govardhan using just
one finger.
Munibawa then appreciated Maharaj and bowed to him
with folded hands. Maharaj seated him nearby, then took off
his own rose garland and placed it around the scholar’s neck.
With Maharaj’s grace, as Munibawa inhaled the fragrance of
the roses he experienced samadhi.
Upon coming out of samadhi, Munibawa was convinced of
Maharaj’s supremacy. He stood humbly, requesting Maharaj
to initiate him as a sadhu. Maharaj agreed and soon initiated
him, yet kept his name as Munibawa. Brahmanand Swami was
delighted.
At Maharaj’s behest, the scholar, now one of Maharaj’s sadhus, returned to Surat and brought many of his followers, including state officials such as Ardeshar Kotwal and others, into
the fellowship.
After having joined the fellowship, Ardeshar Kotwal
subsequently invited Maharaj to Surat and organized a grand
reception for him. Pleased with Kotwal’s devotion, Maharaj
presented him with his pagh as a gift.
c c c

Shriji Maharaj once went to Kutch along with his sadhus
and devotees. Here, in the town of Mandvi, he sat Brahmanand
Swami on a horse and arranged a grand procession for him.
In Mandvi lived a great learned scholar of Vedanta by the
name of Khaiyo Khatri. When he learnt of Maharaj’s arrival in
town, he challenged Maharaj to a scriptural debate.
Realizing the scholar’s intentions, Maharaj devised a plan.
Turning to Brahmanand Swami, he said, “When Khaiyo
Khatri arrives for the debate, you sit in my place, and I will sit on
the ground nearby. When he asks you questions, point to me and
tell him, ‘This disciple of mine will answer all your questions.’”
8 | Satsang Reader 1

Brahmanand Swami hesitated, for Maharaj was asking him
to play the role of God. Yet, he was helpless in the face of
Maharaj’s command.
Khaiyo Khatri and his disciples soon arrived in the assembly.
Khaiyo’s eyes fell on Brahmanand Swami. Seated on Maharaj’s
seat, Brahmanand Swami looked imposing on account of his good
looks and physique. Taking Brahmanand Swami to be Bhagwan
Swaminarayan himself, Khaiyo began asking him questions.
“This disciple of mine will reply,” Brahmanand Swami said,
pointing towards Maharaj.
Maharaj gave clear and logical replies to each of Khaiyo’s
questions. His unfailing answers left the scholar taken aback
and wondering which of the two was the real Swaminarayan
Khaiyo’s mother, sitting afar, quelled his doubt. “Look, my
son,” she said. “This younger sadhu sitting on the ground is
God. The sadhu sitting on the seat is a fake!”
Seeing Khaiyo’s confusion, Maharaj burst out laughing.
Brahmanand Swami at once got up and had Maharaj sit on
the high seat. He himself sat on the ground.
Khaiyo’s misconceptions about Maharaj were cleared. Once
a critic, Khaiyo Khatri now became a devotee.
c c c

Maharaj had begun to construct mandirs. To supervise
the building of the first mandir in Ahmedabad, Maharaj sent
Brahmanand Swami, an expert in managing such affairs. In
Ahmedabad, Brahmanand Swami met General Gordon, an
official of the British government, and obtained from him an
unlimited deed for the land on which the mandir was to be built.
Construction soon began. Brahmanand Swami, although in
charge of the entire project, also helped in the routine manual
labour. He assisted in tasks such as cutting stones, preparing
lime mortar and digging foundation pits. Amidst such rigorous
work, however, he continued to compose poems. Whenever he
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 9

had time, he would jot down some lines of devotional poetry.
The new mandir was soon complete. A grand celebration
was held and the murtis of Nar-Narayan Dev were consecrated
in the mandir.
Soon after Ahmedabad mandir was opened, Maharaj
instructed Brahmanand Swami to build a mandir in Vartal.
Maharaj initially told him to build a one-pinnacled mandir in
Vartal. However, Brahmanand Swami began to build a threepinnacled mandir.
As the soil of Gujarat was soft, it was necessary to dig deep
foundations. A great amount of resources thus went into the
mandir’s foundation. Thus, Maharaj wrote him a letter advising
him to stay within the available means.
Brahmanand Swami replied to Maharaj with a couplet:
Saãheb sarikhã shethiyã, base nagarki mãhi,
Tãke dhanki kyã kami! Jãki hundi chale navkhand mãhi...”
Meaning: “A wealthy man lives in this city; what then is
lacking for him whose bills are accepted in all nine continents?”
Pleased with Brahmanand Swami’s understanding, Maharaj
allowed him to continue with his plans.
Maharaj often visited Vartal to oversee the mandir
construction. Due to his guidance and inspiration, the mandir
was soon complete. Amidst much celebration, Maharaj
consecrated the murtis of Lakshmi-Narayan Dev in the central
shrine and also his own murti, under the name of ‘Harikrishna’,
in the first shrine.
Maharaj then sent Brahmanand Swami with Gunatitanand
Swami to build the next mandir in Junagadh. There was great
opposition from the city’s Nagar Brahmins. In response to the
opposition, Brahmanand Swami convinced the city’s nawab, or
head administrator, of Maharaj’s greatness. Brahmanand Swami
thus won official backing for the mandir, greatly easing the work
of building the mandir. The Nagar opposition soon subsided.
10 | Satsang Reader 1

Within a short time the mandir in Junagadh was complete
and Maharaj arrived for its opening. A grand reception, in the
form of a procession, was arranged to take Maharaj through
the streets of Junagadh. Some of the Nagars were still burning
with rage. Seeking revenge, they sent an untamed horse for
Brahmanand Swami to ride during the reception. Swami’s mere
touch immediately calmed the horse immediately. Maharaj thus
used to call Brahmanand Swami a true yati.
The murtis of Radha-Raman Dev were consecrated in
the new mandir. The nawab, pleased by Maharaj’s presence,
ceremoniously received Maharaj and his sadhus at his palace. He
then asked Maharaj to bless him with good fortunes. Maharaj
blessed the nawab, pleasing him. Moreover, due to the nawab’s
request, he appointed a great sadhu like Gunatitanand Swami
as the mahant of the new mandir.
c c c

Maharaj used to test his sadhus in many different ways. One
of these tests came in the form of a new rule – each sadhu was
to be given a four-and-a-half-foot-long piece of jute, the thick,
rough material from which sacks are made, to use as clothing.
One after the other, all the sadhus came to collect their
standard-sized piece of jute. Brahmanand Swami came as well.
Despite Brahmanand Swami’s large size, Maharaj gave him
four-and-a-half feet, just as he had given to all the other sadhus.
“Maharaj,” Brahmanand Swami said. “I am large. This much
jute will not be enough. Please give me a little more.”
“Rules are rules,” Maharaj replied. “Lose some weight. Fast
a bit.”
“But how can I lose weight this very instant?” Brahmanand
Swami asked, puzzled as to what to do next.
Suddenly, a thought appeared in his mind. He began looking
up, down and all around.
“What are you looking at?” Maharaj asked.
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 11

“In this world, there is not even an inch of land where there
is any God other than you,” Brahmanand Swami replied. “I
have no choice, but to stay here with you.”
Seeing Brahmanand Swami’s firm faith, Maharaj was pleased
and instantly gave him a longer piece of jute.
c c c

Maharaj had made yet another rule for his sadhus – nobody
was to doze in the assembly. Whenever Maharaj caught someone
dozing, he would throw his berkho at them.
Once, during the late evening assembly, Maharaj caught
Brahmanand Swami dozing. He threw his berkho on him. Brahmanand Swami woke up with a startle. He got up and returned
the berkho to Maharaj.
“Maharaj,” Brahmanand Swami asked, “Why did you throw
the berkho?”
“You were dozing,” Maharaj replied.
“I wasn’t dozing, Maharaj. I was composing a kirtan.”
Brahmanand Swami’s quick-witted answer amused Maharaj.
“Then let us hear your kirtan,” Maharaj challenged.
Brahmanand Swami thus began:
Tãro chatak rangilo chhedalo, Alabelã re,
Kãi naval kasumbi pãgh, rangnã relã re…
Meaning: “Oh charming one, how bright red the end of your
upper garment is;
“How crimson red your headgear is, splashed all over with
the colour red.”
Brahmanand Swami would sing a line, and while the audience
sang in chorus, he would compose the next line. In this manner,
he instantly composed four verses. Although Maharaj and the
sadhus knew that Brahmanand Swami was really dozing, they
were delighted to see his exceptional skill of intantly composing
poems.
c c c

12 | Satsang Reader 1

During Maharaj’ final illness in Gadhada. During his illness,
he would call Brahmanand Swami to see him every day, praising
him and giving him prasad from his dish.
Brahmanand Swami, however, had his doubts. “There has
to be a reason why Maharaj is treating me so well,” he thought.
Maharaj’s condition gradually worsened. Brahmanand Swami prepared sanjivani, an elixir, but Maharaj refused to take it.
Other sadhus also requested Maharaj to take the medicine, but
Maharaj was adamant.
“Maharaj may not stay on earth much longer,” Brahmanand
Swami thought.
However, to Brahmanand Swami’s dismay, Maharaj
instructed him to go to Junagadh. Who would ever wish to
leave Maharaj at such a time, he thought.
Realizing Brahmanand Swami’s predicament, Maharaj
consoled him. “Go, and once you reach there, send Gunatitanand
Swami here immediately,” Maharaj added.
With a heavy heart, Brahmanand Swami left for Junagadh.
Once there, he told Gunatitanand Swami that Maharaj had
immediately called for him.
Gunatitanand Swami left for Gadhada immediately upon
hearing Brahmanand Swami’s words. Arriving in Gadhada, he
met Maharaj. A short while later, Maharaj left his physical body
and poassed away to his divine abode, Akshardham.
c c c

With Maharaj’s return to Akshardham, Brahmanand Swami
was not able to focus on anything. However, Maharaj had
already instructed him to build a mandir in Muli. Therefore,
he set out to begin work on the mandir.
However, there was scarcity of water and stones for building
the mandir. Maharaj gave divine darshan to Brahmanand Swami
and showed him a stone mine. The building of Muli mandir
was Brahmanand Swami’s final task. He made the mandir a
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 13

marvellous work of art, full of traditional designs. The mandir
was completed in a short time and the acharya of Ahmedabad
performed the murti-pratishtha amidst much festivity.
Thereafter, Brahmanand Swami resided in Muli. He would
often sit in the mandir and sing beautiful kirtans before the
murtis. He had obeyed Maharaj’s wishes and now he was focused
on becoming one with Maharaj.
Soon, Brahmanand Swami fell ill. Devanand Swami and
other sadhus were constantly in his service. Brahmanand Swami
called Nishkulanand Swami, Gunatitanand Swami, Acharya
Maharaj and others to come to grant him darshan one last time.
Once they arrived, Brahmanand Swami called Gunatitanand
Swami and said, “Don’t be in a hurry to come to Akshardham.
Continue spreading the knowledge of Maharaj’s true glory, as
you have been doing until now. Don’t come until Maharaj’s
greatness has spread everywhere.”
Soon thereafter Brahmanand Swami passed away to
Akshardham on 8 June 1832 ce (Jeth sud 10, Samvat 1888) to
forever remain in the seva of Shriji Maharaj.
A shining jewel amongst Maharaj’s inner circle of disciples,
Brahmanand Swami served the Sampradaya in many ways. His
contributions include building grand mandirs in Ahmedabad,
Vartal, Junagadh and Muli. Moreover, he enriched the
Sampraday’s literature, as well as Gujarati literature in general,
with his extraordinary poetic skills. He composed over 8,000
kirtans in Gujarati and other languages. His specialities in poetry
were chhand and chopai, metrical forms with which very few are
conversant today. Through his bhajans, he related teachings on
spirituality, the greatness of atma and Paramatma, the path of
devotion, the beauty and glory of Maharaj’s murti and many
other topics.
The following are some of his well-known works: Brahmanand
Kavya, Shri Sumatiprakash, Brahmavilas, Shikshapatri (in verse),
14 | Satsang Reader 1

Updesh Chintamani Chandravala and Updesh Ratnadipak.
Some of his lesser known works include: Nitiprakash,
Shikshapatri (in Hindi), Sampradaya Pradip, Dharmasiddhant,
Vartman Vivek, Shri Narayan Gita, Vivek Chintamani, Sati Gita
and Dharmavansh Prakash.
Brahmanand Swami’s architectural and literary contributions
to the Sampraday and to the region are thus invaluable and will
live on forever.
Example of Brahmanand Swami’s Work

Tãrã mukhni lãvantã mithi re, Mohan Vanmali,
Evi tribhuvanmã nav dithi re, murti marmãli..
Chatak rangilã tãrã molidãne chhede;
Manadu dole chhe kede kede re
...Mohan. 1
Rangado jãmyo chhe fuladãne tore,
Bhramar bhame chhe chahukore re
...Mohan. 2
Bhãl tilak kesar keru rãje,
Mukh joi shashiyar lãje re
...Mohan. 3
Brahmãnand kahe sarvasva vãru,
Rup joine vahãlã tãru re
...Mohan. 4
Meaning
Sweet is the charm of your face, O Mohan, the gardener!
Nowhere in the world have I seen such a wonderful figure…
My mind runs after the bright red ends of your garment,
O Mohan...1
Bright is the colour of the flowers of the garlands you wear.
And the bees hum all around you, O Mohan…2
This I say on s
Saffron tilak adorns your forehead;
my beloved one,
It puts the moon itself to shame, O Mohan…3
Brahmanand says that I sacrifice my all for you;
Sadguru Brahmanand Swami | 15

Sadguru Devanand Swami

2. Sadguru Devanand Swami
On the outskirts of the villages of Balol and Dhingda, in the
present-day district of Ahmedabad, there is a small, beautiful
mandir dedicated to Bhagwan Shiv, known as Sankaleshwar
Mahadev. Jijibhai, who lived in Balol, was one of the many
devotees who used to go to the mandir every day to worship
and pray before Shivji. His five-year-old son, Devidan, would
go with him, holding his father’s finger and keenly observing
his father’s deep devotion and worship. This daily ritual left an
indelible mark on Devidan regarding the importance of worship
and prayer.
Some time later, Jijibhai had to go out of town to attend a
discourse. To continue his father’s tradition of worship, Devidan
went to the mandir alone. He had eagerly watched his father’s
daily routine, and so as he sat before the murti of Shivji, feelings
of devotion and an inner desire to please Shivji poured from his
innocent heart. Full of affection, as if Bhagwan Shiv were really
present before him, he devoutly offered abhishek and bilipatra
to the murti. He then fixed his gaze on Shivji, yearning to meet
him.
Devidan’s heartfelt prayers were answered. Shivji appeared
before him, granting him darshan. Choked with emotion, the
child folded his hands and prayed, his heart filled with nothing
other than a wish for liberation.
Pleased with Devidan’s pure devotion, Shivji granted him a
boon. “Bhagwan Purushottam Narayan himself will come to
your village and will reveal his divine powers. Seek refuge at his
feet. Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, will reside in your heart.”
Born in Balol, near Dholka, on 9 November 1802 (Kartik sud
Punam, Samvat 1859), Devidan was a changed boy. After having
Shivji’s, darshan his mind became constantly drawn towards
devotion. Even his mother, Benjiba, noticed the change in him.
Sadguru Devanand Swami | 17

Around this time, Bhagwan Swaminarayan came to Balol
after completing a yagna in nearby Jetalpur. The townspeople
gathered around Shriji Maharaj’s bullock cart for darshan. They
insisted that he stay.
However, Maharaj needed to move on, so in the hope of
serving Maharaj before he left, Raya Khatan, a devotee, quickly
brought a bowl of milk and thuli, a preparation of wheat flakes.
Accepting the thuli, Maharaj rolled his sleeves up to his elbows,
sat on the yoke of the cart, the portion tied to the bullocks. He
let his feet dangle to the ground and he soon began to eat. But
as he ate, streams of milk trickled down to his elbows. Seeing the
streams, Maharaj leaned over and licked each from his elbows
straight up to his hands.
Devidan was surprised, yet Maharaj’s murti had long since
left him enchanted.
Maharaj’s eyes soon fell on Devidan. Knowing the young
boy to be a great soul from the past, Maharaj lovingly called
him forth. Devidan ran towards Maharaj, falling at his feet and
expressed his wish to travel with him. Pleased, Maharaj agreed
with his idea, but coaxed him to first ask his parents. Devidan
asked his parents and once they had agreed, he joined Maharaj.
He was soon put under Brahmanand Swami’s care.
Brahmanand Swami had Devidan serve with him for some
time, after which Maharaj initiated him as a sadhu, naming
him Devanand Swami.
As a sadhu, Devanand Swami began to learn music and
Pingal, the science of poetry from Brahmanand Swami while
also learning to play the sitar. In just a short time, Devanand
Swami became an expert in all of these fields due, in part, to
his past samskaras. It was due to his virtues as a celibate sadhu,
his lack of ego, and his intense devotion, that Devanand Swami
became renowned in the fellowship and soon took his place
amongst Maharaj’s eight most famous poets – Devanand Swami,
18 | Satsang Reader 1

Premanand Swami, Brahmanand Swami, Muktanand Swami,
Nishkulanand Swami, Bhumanand Swami, Manjukeshanand
Swami and Dayanand Swami.
Throughout his life, Devanand Swami wrote thousands of
kirtans, most describing spiritual teachings with an emphasis
on detachment. Using simple language and everyday examples,
he elegantly explained important spiritual lessons and wrote of
the futility of worldly life, inspiring souls to turn their attention
towards God. He also wrote of potential fallbacks on the spiritual
path in a rather blunt style. His eye-opening verses are thus
popularly known in the fellowship as the ‘lashes’ of Devanand
Swami.
Devanand Swami’s verses had quite an impact. In fact,
on hearing them, Dalpatram, a famous Indian poet, was so
moved that he decided to become Devanand Swami’s student.
Devanand Swami thus taught Dalpatram poetic metres,
figurative writing, descriptive writing, word usage and the
art of instant composition. Devanand Swami’s guidance, as
well as his blessings, moulded Dalpatram into a master poet.
Devanand Swami was pleased to see his student’s progress and
extraordinary poetic skills, but rather than taking the credit
himself, he used to say, “This is all due to Maharaj’s grace.”
Aside from being an expert in music and poetry, Devanand
Swami had a deep understanding of spirituality and firm faith
in Maharaj. His blessings would drive away people’s miseries
and would fulfil their wishes, yet he always remained humble,
forever crediting his abilities to Shriji Maharaj’s grace.
After Brahmanand Swami passed away to Akshardham,
Devanand Swami succeeded him as mahant of Muli mandir.
As mahant, he completed the construction of the mandir and
surrounding buildings. With his expertise in management, he
greatly increased the mandir’s prosperity.
On 28 August 1853 (Shravan vad 9, Samvat 1910), Devanand
Sadguru Devanand Swami | 19

Swami told a Merai devotee, “I am going to Dham tomorrow, so
please make a wooden chair to take my body to the funeral pyre.”
The devotee was surprised, as Devanand Swami looked
perfectly healthy. Doubting his words, the devotee refused to
make the chair.
Devanand Swami, however, continued. “If five footsteps of
kumkum show up at the entrance to your home tomorrow,
believe what I say to be true,” he said.
The next day, the devotee saw the kumkum footsteps
Devanand Swami had mentioned. Taken aback, he hurriedly
left for the mandir. When he arrived, he learned that Devanand
Swami had passed away to Akshardham. The devotee was
stricken with grief.
Soon after, Devanand Swami’s body was taken to the river
bank, where his final rites were performed.
The following are examples of Devanand Swami’s kirtans.
Mãnasno avatãr mogho, nahi male fari
...Mãnas. 1
Mãn, mardãi, motap meli, bhajilo Hari;
Nahi to jãsho chorãshimã, janam bahu dhari
...Mãnas. 2
Dukh tano dariyãv moto, nahi shako tari;
Shamaliyãne sharane jãtã, jãsho ugari
...Mãnas. 3
Nirlaj tu navro na rahyo, ghar-dhandho kari;
Mãyã mãyã karto murakh, nã betho thari
...Mãnas. 4
Cheti le chittmã vichãri, chãlaje dari,
Devãnandno Nãth bhajo, premamã bhari
...Manas. 5
Meaning
A human birth is difficult to get; you will not get it again...1
Forsake your pride and arrogance, and devote yourself to God;
20 | Satsang Reader 1

Otherwise you will be forced to pass through 84
lakh births, taking birth again and again...2
It is difficult to cross the great ocean of pain;
You will get over it if you surrender yourself to God...3
Oh shameful one, you remained so busy in worldly affairs;
You went on doing this and that crying ‘maya’, ‘maya’...4
Think in your mind and be warned, walk cautiously;
Worship Devanand’s God and fill yourself with love...5
c c c

Bhaji le Bhagwãn, sãchã Santne mali
...Bhaji. 1
Vachanmã vishvãs rãkhi, bhajanmã bhali,
Purav kerã pãp tãrã, to jãshe bali
...Bhaji. 2
Olakhi le Avinãshi, raheje gnãnmã gali,
Rijhshe rang-rel Vãlo, adhalak dhali
...Bhaji. 3
Kãl to vikrãl veri, vinkhashe vali;
Kãm ne kutumb tune nãkhshe dali
...Bhaji. 4
Satya tyã sukh dharma rahe, kud tahã Kali;
Devãnand kahe duniyã keri akkal ãndhali
...Bhaji. 5
Meaning
Pray to God through association with a true Sadhu...1
Have faith in [his] words and immerse yourself in bhajan;
		
Your past sins will be burnt away...2
Recognize God, and immerse yourself in knowledge;
		
He shall bestow his grace in all spontaneity...3
Kal is a ferocious enemy, it may pounce any moment;
		
Desires and family will grind you to pieces...4
Happiness and dharma stay where there is satya,
		
Kali stays where there is no dharma;
Sadguru Devanand Swami | 21

Devanand says that the world
is blind to stark realities...5

Sadguru Shukanand Swami

3. Sadguru Shukanand Swami
Jagannath, a Brahmin originally from Nadiad, had settled
in Dabhan. He was born in 1799 (Samvat 1855). Due to his
family’s noble values, he grew into a brilliant child. Also, due
to his natural intelligence, he excelled in studies.
From the beginning a natural detachment from the world
was evident in him. It was as if he were a soul reborn simply
to complete yogic austerities begun long ago. The virtuous
naturally attract good qualities. Thus, he was also proficient in
managing social duties and soon became an expert at negotiating
land deals and other related work.
At the time, a number of Bhagwan Swaminarayan’s
paramhansas were studying in Dabhan under a learned scholar.
Jagannath, with his inherent liking for satsang, came in touch
with these paramhansas. Seeing their pure lifestyle, he developed
great love and respect for them and soon began to serve them.
In return, the paramhansas would speak to him of Maharaj’s
greatness. Touched by their words, Jagannath became eager to
have Maharaj’s darshan and hear his talks. So, without giving
it a second thought, Jagannath renounced home and left for
Gadhada.
As Jagannath came to the village outskirts, Maharaj was seated in an assembly underneath the neem tree in Dada Khachar’s
darbar.
“Let’s go, let’s go,” Maharaj suddenly said to the assembled
devotees. “A mukta is coming from Dabhan.”
Maharaj’s words left the devotees surprised. Yet, before
anyone even had time to think, Maharaj was up and moving
away. The devotees got up and followed him as he took the road
to Radha Vav, a step well on the outskirts of Gadhada.
Beaming due to the lustre of brahmacharya, and eager to
embrace God, Jagannath strode quickly towards Maharaj. As
Sadguru Shukanand Swami | 23

soon as he saw Maharaj, he prostrated before him. Maharaj also
ran towards him and welcomed him with an embrace.
Jagannath stayed with Maharaj in Gadhada. He deeply
wished to become a sadhu, but he was hesitant to ask Maharaj
himself. So, he requested Somla Khachar, “Ask Maharaj to make
me a sadhu.” Somla Khachar told Maharaj, “The Brahmin from
Dabhan wants to become a sadhu.”
Maharaj replied, “Take him to Muktanand Swami. He will
make him a sadhu.”
Accordingly, in February 1816 (Maha, Samvat 1872),
Muktanand Swami performed the Vedic rites, initiating
Jagannath as a sadhu. He named him Shukanand Swami.
After the ceremony, Shukanand Swami went straight to
Akshar Ordi and prostrated before Maharaj. Pleased at seeing
the new sadhu, Maharaj got up and hugged him.
“What have you been named?” Maharaj asked.
“Shukanand!” he replied.
“It seems as if Muktanand Swami knows the name you had
in your previous life,” Maharaj commented. He then instructed
Shukanand Swami to remain in his seva.
c c c

Also known as Shuk Muni, Shukanand Swami lived in a room
opposite Shriji Maharaj’s residence, Akshar Ordi. There he spent
his time writing and editing scriptures. He prepared manuscripts
from the original copies of the Vachanamrut and Satsangijivan,
as well as drafts of the Sampradaya’s constitutional documents.
Shuk Muni also served as Maharaj’s secretary, writing and
responding to his letters. His neat and clear handwriting, and
knowledge of prose and poetry in both Gujarati and Sanskrit
shone through in his writings.
As secretary, Shuk Muni often had to face Maharaj’s tests of
faith. One night, Maharaj was dictating a letter to him. Halfway
through the letter Maharaj cancelled it and had him start all
24 | Satsang Reader 1

over again. Maharaj repeated this pattern late into the night. In
fact, it got so late that even the candle lighting Maharaj’s room
had gone out. Maharaj, however, lit the room with a beam of
light emanating from the big toe of his right foot.
By the time the letter was complete, it was morning. Shuk
Muni was late for his morning bath. All the other sadhus had
already returned after bathing in the River Ghela and completed
their morning rituals. Shuk Muni began to worry about who
would now accompany him to the river? Without bathing and
performing his morning worship rituals he would not be able
to break his previous day’s ekadashi fast.
Maharaj sensed Shuk Muni’s worry and said, “Here, take this
sukhdi and use it today to freshen your mouth.”
Maharaj’s wish was for Shuk Muni to break his fast there
and then. So, Shuk Muni followed Maharaj’s wish and broke
his fast. He then left to bathe.
On another occasion, Shuk Muni stayed up all night writing
in the veranda in front of the Akshar Ordi. He had written 14
pages by the time Maharaj came out of his room in the morning.
Maharaj took Shuk Muni’s work in his hands. Unexpectedly,
he tore it and threw it into the courtyard. Shuk Muni, however,
did not utter a single word in protest.
Nityanand Swami subsequently asked Shuk Muni, “Weren’t
you upset that Maharaj tore up a whole night’s work without
even looking at it?”
Shuk Muni replied without thinking twice. “I wrote it solely
to please Maharaj,” he said. “If tearing it up pleased him, then
so be it.”
Shuk Muni thus never allowed his mind to get in the way
of his bhakti towards Maharaj.
c c c

Maharaj used to look after Shuk Muni in many different
ways, often giving him prasad from his dish.
Sadguru Shukanand Swami | 25

Once, Shuk Muni returned shivering after bathing in the
early morning in the River Ghela. Seeing this, Maharaj asked
Dada Khachar, pointing towards the ceiling, “Can’t these
support beams be removed? How about these shutters?” It
seemed that Maharaj wished to make a fire for Shuk Muni.
Immediately understanding Maharaj’s wish, Dada Khachar
called a carpenter to cut some wood. Dada Khachar then broke
open a clay pot and lit a fire in it from the wood. He brought
the fire before Maharaj, who then called Shuk Muni and the
other sadhus to warm themselves. Maharaj was delighted.
c c c

When in Gadhada, Maharaj frequently went to Lakshmi
Vadi, a farm belonging to Dada Khachar and his family. Here,
there was a mango tree. When Maharaj sat on a cot underneath
it, the tree’s branches touched Maharaj’s head. Seeing this,
Maharaj would say, “This mango tree seems to be quite eager
to be close to me.” Continuing, in praise of Shuk Muni, he
would say, “This mango tree from Dabhan, the bullock from
Dabhan and this Shuk Muni from Dabhan, all three have been
very useful to me. Shuk Muni, in fact, is my right hand.”
In this way, Maharaj would remember Shuk Muni and praise
him profusely.
c c c

After Maharaj had passed away to Akshardham, Bhaguji,
Maharaj’s attendant, once walked into the Akshar Ordi. As he
walked in, he was surprised to find Maharaj seated on his bed.
Maharaj said, “Bhaguji, go call Shuk Muni. I wish to write
a letter.”
Hearing Maharaj’s words, Bhaguji ran off to call Shuk Muni.
When Shuk Muni arrived, Maharaj turned to him and said, “I
want to write a letter. Please write as I speak.”
With these words, Maharaj dictated an entire letter to Shuk
Muni and had him read out loud what he had written. Shuk
26 | Satsang Reader 1

Muni began reading, but Maharaj then disappeared, leaving
Shuk Muni with only the letter in his hands. This miracle was
witnessed by everyone present.
c c c

After Maharaj’s passing, Shuk Muni used to travel from village
to village to spread Satsang. However, he still dearly missed
Maharaj. During his travels, due to his zeal for renunciation and
detachment, he would often pray that he be blessed with illness.
The reason being that his body would become weak, helping
him to avoid the pleasures of the senses. Maharaj answered his
prayers. Thus, Shuk Muni would serve the Satsang during the
day, and would fall ill at night. This routine continued for 12
long years.
c c c

Shuk Muni had much affection for Gunatitanand Swami, as
Maharaj had many times revealed to him Gunatitanand Swami’s
eternal greatness. On one occasion, Gunatitanand Swami had
come to the Akshar Ordi for Maharaj’s darshan. Seeing him
enter, Shuk Muni scrambled to find a seat for him.
Seeing this, Maharaj commented, “Gunatitanand Swami’s
greatness is not due to the seat. He is eternally great.” So saying,
he revealed Gunatitanand Swami’s greatness as Akshar, his
divine abode, to Shuk Muni.
Also, after Maharaj had passed away, Shuk Muni often went
to Junagadh to stay in the company of Gunatitanand Swami.
Shuk Muni frequently said, “I wrote the Vachanamruts after
researching them, but I have understood them only today. When
Gunatitanand Swami speaks, one feels the same satisfaction as
when Maharaj spoke.”
Once, Acharya Ayodhyaprasadji Maharaj was sick in
Ahmedabad. Gunatitanand Swami and Shuk Muni went to
visit him. While there, Gunatitanand Swami spoke openly of
Bhagwan Swaminarayan’s glory as Purushottam in the assembly.
Sadguru Shukanand Swami | 27

One day, in the assembly, Gunatitanand Swami said to Shuk
Muni, “Maharaj once asked you in Akshar Ordi to write a letter
to some devotees. In that letter, you described Maharaj to be
like Prahlad and King Janak, who were great devotees of God.
Maharaj tore up that letter. When you wrote the letter again,
you described him to be like the avatars of Vishnu, Dattatrey
and Kapil. Maharaj also tore that letter to pieces. By then, the
candle lighting Maharaj’s room had been extinguished. Maharaj
then lit up the room with a beam of light from the big toe of
his right foot. Within that light, you saw many divine forms
with folded hands, praying before the divine, ever-youthful
murti of Maharaj.”
In this way, Maharaj had thus revealed to Shuk Muni
that he was neither a devotee nor an avatar but God himself.
Hearing Gunatitanand Swami’s words, Shuk Muni recalled the
incident and was convinced both of Maharaj’s supreme glory
and Gunatitanand Swami’s greatness.
c c c

In 1865 (Samvat 1921), after having celebrated a festival in
Vartal, Shuk Muni came to Mahelav. There, he gave vartman to
Dhoribhai’s six-month-old son, Dungarbhai, who later became
known as Shastriji Maharaj. He had blessed, “This child will do
great work for satsang and will spread Maharaj’s true upasana.”
c c c

Seventeen years younger than Maharaj, Shuk Muni’s physical
condition had always been delicate. On 4 December 1868
(Magshar vad 5, Samvat 1925), Shuk Muni passed away in
Vartal.
Maharaj has praised Shuk Muni in Vachanamrut, Kariyani
3, saying, “This Shuk Muni is a very great sadhu. From the
day he began staying with me, his enthusiasm has been ever
increasing; in fact, it has never diminished. Thus, he is like
Muktanand Swami.”
28 | Satsang Reader 1

Shuk Muni was a great Sanskrit scholar. Some of his works
include:
u
Buddhi Pradip
u
Jnan Pradip
u
Prarthana Mala
u
Lokmangalakhyan
u
Vishvamangal Ashtottarashatanam
u
Shikshapatri Anvayarth Tika
u
Satsangijivan Hetu Tika
His Gujarati works include:
u
Editing of the Vachanamrut
u
Dasham Uttarardh
u
Buddhi Prakash
u
Dharmamrut
u
Narayan Kavach
u
Satsang Deep
u
Bhakti Adhyay
u
Hari Gita
u
Commentary on the Dharmik Stotra
u
Prarthana-mala

Sadguru Shukanand Swami | 29

Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar

4. Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar
The Royal Court of Junagadh was crowded with darbars
(village chieftains). Beer bottles lay before them as glasses full
of alcoholic drinks and opium pipes were passed around. An
exotic dancer entertained the crowd to the beat of live music.
With singing, dancing and alcohol in abundance, the lecherous
chieftains revelled in these sensual moments.
One darbar, however, sat in the corner with his head down
and eyes glued to the floor, feeling uneasy as ever. The nawab,
head of the royal court and the city’s main administrator, was
too busy to notice, for he was engrossed in accepting praises
from his subordinates. Suddenly, however, his eyes fell on the
lonely chieftain. It was Jhinabhai of Panchala.
Seeing Jhinabhai aloof from the crowd, the nawab developed
deep respect for him. “This soul is one that is truly in love with
God. He seems to have conquered his senses,” he remarked in
amazement.
Panchala, Jhinabhai’s village, is in the Nagher region of
Sorath, the southern part of Saurashtra.
Jhinabhai was born in 1792 (Samvat 1848). His father was
Thakor Manubha, a Solanki Vaghela Rajput and descendant of
the great King Siddharaj Jaysinh.
When Jhinabhai was ten years old, his father, a disciple of
Sadguru Ramanand Swami, received both Ramanand Swami
and Nilkanth Varni in his court in Panchala. During this visit,
Jhinabhai received Ramanand Swami’s blessings for the first
time.
After Ramanand Swami passed away, Jhinabhai was drawn
towards Bhagwan Swaminarayan by Bhagwan Swaminarayan’s
miracles. Along with Jhinabhai, his mother, Gangaba, and
sister, Adiba, also soon became devotees.
Jhinabhai had a great liking for satsang. Though being born
Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar | 31

and brought up amidst the luxury of a royal family, he had
a deep dislike for material pleasures. In fact, he saw nothing
other than misery even in the best of sense pleasures. To please
Maharaj, he strictly followed the vows of satsang. He lived a
simple life, constantly fearing that his love for Maharaj could at
anytime drift elsewhere. Seeing his constant awareness, Maharaj
often used to praise him.
A large portion of Jhinabhai’s income was spent for Satsang.
Moreover, the greatness of Maharaj’s fellowship was firm in
Jhinabhai’s mind, and so he would always help other devotees,
would not bear talks or even thoughts of anyone’s flaws and
would take their side even at the cost of his life.
Jhinabhai was deeply devoted to Maharaj, and so he would
often stay with Maharaj to listen to his talks. Moreover, he
would unfailingly invite Maharaj, his sadhus and devotees once
a year to Panchala to celebrate grand festivals. In hosting such
festivals, Jhinabhai would spend freely. Indeed, Jhinabhai had
dedicated his life for Satsang.
c c c

As the drought of 1813 ce (Samvat 1869) threatened the
region, Maharaj began vicharan, going everywhere to warn his
devotees in advance of the coming troubles. Taking Maharaj’s
advice, Jhinabhai sold his livestock and also stockpiled grains.
Accordingly, once the drought hit, he was able to help devotees,
as well as the poor, by giving away large amounts of grains.
However, despite his generosity, Jhinabhai’s farms still reaped
profits. Therefore, he offered extra donations in accordance with
Maharaj’s wishes. Moreover, he asked that Maharaj keep 50
sadhus at his place until the drought passed. Maharaj granted
his wish. Jhinabhai thus served the sadhus, and benefited from
their company and discourses.
c c c

Jhinabhai once requested Maharaj to come to Panchala and
32 | Satsang Reader 1

to bring with him, along with other devotees, Jivuba and other
female devotees living in Gadhada. Maharaj, wishing for the
women to stay back, left for Panchala without them. Jhinabhai,
however, insisted that they come. And so, although it was not
Maharaj’s wish, Jhinabhai gathered all the female devotees and
left for Panchala along with them. He soon caught up with
Maharaj. On seeing that Jhinabhai had disobeyed his wish,
Maharaj turned back for Gadhada, disappointed.
Jhinabhai had much love for Maharaj. At the same time,
however, Jhinabhai could be a little obstinate. To teach him a
lesson and to rid him of this flaw, Maharaj decided to return
to Gadhada. Jhinabhai pleaded, tearfully urging Maharaj to
visit, yet Maharaj was adamant. Sura Khachar and others later
cheered Maharaj, yet his decision not to visit Panchala was firm.
Jhinabhai would often attempt to please Maharaj in his own
way. However, Maharaj believed that one should always act
according to God’s wishes. He would thus say, “It is not wise
to offer bhakti with stubbornness, for neither such bhakti nor
such love last long.”
On another occasion, Jhinabhai was deeply hurt by Maharaj’s
decision not to come to Panchala. However, he soon realized
his mistake and felt guilty. His hurt was soothed by spiritual
understanding. Maharaj loved his devotees and had a forgiving
nature.
Three or four months later, Maharaj came to Panchala and
blessed Jhinabhai with the opportunity to serve him and listen
to his talks. Jhinabhai was both intelligent and knowledgeable.
Realizing his level of thought, Maharaj gave profound discourses
on spirituality, leaving him pleased. These discourses can today
be found in the Panchala section of the Vachanamrut.
c c c

Jhinabhai was an expert in managing business ventures
or events. Whenever Maharaj held grand yagnas or festivals,
Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar | 33

Jhinabhai would arrive ahead of time to lead the preparations.
His arrangements were excellent and the events he managed
were always a success.
Jhinabhai was firm when it came to observing his moral
vows. He would not tolerate even the slightest lapse. In fact, he
was so staunch in his vows that he had won the respect of the
entire Satsang community. Accordingly, Maharaj would often
send him to reprimand devotees that had faltered in their vows.
Seeing that it was Jhinabhai’s deep desire, Maharaj decided
to celebrate the Fuldol festival of 1823 ce (Samvat 1879) in
Panchala with great festivity and joy. Thousands of sadhus and
devotees were invited to come. Tents of varying sizes were set
up as temporary residential arrangements for the devotees. Once
the devotees began to arrive, Jhinabhai served them the best
of foods. Maharaj also pleased everyone with his sublime talks.
On the night of the full moon, the devotees accompanied
Maharaj to an open field on the village outskirts. Adorned in
rich, gold-threaded clothes and beautiful ornaments, Maharaj
arranged for everyone to dance in a raas. Nine circles were
made, the first few being of sadhus, then of parshads and finally
of devotees. Sadhus, playing the jhanjh and mrudang, filled the
air with rhythmic kirtans and music.
To everyone’s delight, Maharaj appeared in numerous forms
and played raas with each and every devotee, showering them
with divine bliss. They exhausted themselves, dancing late into
the night. With the manifest Purushottam Narayan himself
granting such divine joy, who would want the festivities to stop?
However, Maharaj finally brought the raas to a close at 2 a.m.
The following day, the day of Fuldol, the devotees prepared
themselves for the festival. Mounds of gulal were brought, and
water tanks were filled with coloured water. As the festival
began, Maharaj began throwing handfuls of gulal on the devotees
and spraying them with coloured water from his pichkari. He
34 | Satsang Reader 1

continued until all the devotees were soaked.
Maharaj then instructed the sadhus to join. The sadhus soon
formed a team to play against the devotees. Maharaj, standing
atop the stage, began spraying coloured water on everyone.
After the festival, Maharaj, along with the sadhus and
devotees, went to the river to bathe.
Jhinabhai could not contain his joy, for Maharaj had blessed
him with the opportunity to sponsor this unique festival.
Jhinabhai arranged a sumptuous meal for all the devotees,
villagers and the poor from surrounding areas. The Fuldol festival
of 1823 in Panchala has a special place in the Sampradaya’s
history.
Once the festival was over, Maharaj decided to reintroduce
a ritual in the Sampradaya. Now that the British had taken
over India, times had become easier for Maharaj’s sadhus.
Harassment was a thing of the past. Maharaj’s sadhus could
now freely offer worship. Seeing the improved situation, he
instructed his sadhus to once again keep shikhas and wear janois.
He again gave them all pujas. He then taught them all to apply
the gopichandan tilak and kumkum chandlo on their foreheads by
first applying it on his choicest devotee, Gunatitanand Swami.
Pointing towards Gunatitanand Swami, Maharaj explained the
greatness of his divine abode, “This is my tilak, and this is my
sadhu. There is no sadhu like him and there is no God like me.”
c c c

Jhinabhai was very enthusiastic about practising satsang.
In order to be with Maharaj, he set up temporary residence in
Gadhada. He would thus spend half of his time in Panchala and
the other half in Gadhada.
Once, Jhinabhai stayed in Gadhada for a long stretch of
nine months. Soon, however, he began receiving letters calling
him back home. However, he wouldn’t read any of the letters.
Instead, he would slip them underneath his mattress, unopened.
Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar | 35

After some time, a letter came to Maharaj asking if Jhinabhai
was still in Gadhada. On reading the letter, Maharaj asked
Jhinabhai whether he had received the messages from home.
“I have received many letters, but I haven’t read any of
them,” he replied. “If I were to read them, my peace would be
disturbed. I would start getting thoughts of returning home
and I wouldn’t be able to enjoy your discourses.”
Maharaj immediately instructed him to return home, and so
he returned to Panchala. After Jhinabhai had left, Naja Jogia,
another devotee, often began speaking of Jhinabhai before
Maharaj. Maharaj once asked him the reason why he spoke so
often of Jhinabhai.
Showing Maharaj the dhotiyu he was wearing, Naja Jogia
replied, “When Jhinabhai was going home, he gave me this
dhotiyu and, in return, asked me to speak of him before you.
He wished that he may be blessed.”
Hearing of Jhinabhai’s sentiments Maharaj was pleased.
c c c

Once, in order to test Jhinabhai’s faith, Maharaj became ill
in Panchala. No remedies seemed to be effective.
Fearing the worst, Muktanand Swami said to Maharaj, “Even
an ordinary bawa or vairagi leaves his mark by establishing an
ashram sometime during his life. You are Purushottam Narayan.
If you pass away without having left something behind, your
stay on earth will be rendered worthless.”
Heeding Muktanand Swami’s advice, Maharaj decided to
build mandirs, initiate sadhus and create shastras.
“Prepare lunch and I will soon be better,” Maharaj said. Once
lunch was ready, Maharaj ate. Soon thereafter, he recovered
from his illness.
c c c

Once, Jhinabhai came to Mangrol. Here, he came to know
that Kamalshi Vanjha had fallen very ill and that nobody was
36 | Satsang Reader 1

looking after him. Kamalshibhai was a poor basket weaver,
yet a great devotee. Hearing the news that Kamalshibhai was
sick, Jhinabhai went to see him. On seeing Jhinabhai, Kamalshi
began crying, for it seemed as if none of Kamalshi’s relatives
cared for him.
Jhinabhai was pained to see Kamalshi’s predicament. He
wished to take him home with him. Kamalshi, however, was
too weak to walk. So, Jhinabhai went into town and called some
labourers to lift the ill man’s entire cot. He was able to find
only three labourers, and so he acted as the fourth labourer. He
lifted the fourth leg of the cot himself and, with his free hand,
held his horse’s reins.
As Jhinabhai and the labourers came out of Kamalshibhai’s
home, they ran into one of the village leaders. Seeing Jhinabhai,
a highly respected darbar, lifting the cot himself, he quickly
called another labourer from the village to relieve Jhinabhai.
Thereafter, Jhinabhai sat on his horse and led the labourers to
his home.
After arriving in Panchala, Jhinabhai asked his sister, Adiba,
where to place Kamalshi’s cot. Adiba did not respond, as she
was not keen on having to care for such a poor devotee.
Ignoring his sister, Jhinabhai had Kamalshi’s cot placed in his
own room. He served him day and night, washing his clothes,
feeding him and serving him with greater care than he took of
even himself.
Once, Kamalshibhai had a severe headache. Jhinabhai asked
his sister for some black pepper to use as medicine.
“We don’t have any in the house,” Adiba said, brushing aside
Jhinabhai’s request.
A few days later when Jhinabhai had a headache, Adiba
brought some black pepper for him.
“Where did this pepper come from?” asked Jhinabhai.
“There was some already in the house,” Adiba replied.
Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar | 37

“There was no pepper available when it was needed for
Kamalshibhai, and today it has been found!” Jhinabhai spoke
sternly.
Furious, Jhinabhai tossed the bottle of pepper outside and
stopped speaking to his sister.
When Maharaj came to know that Jhinabhai had lifted poor
Kamalshibhai’s cot and had served him with such love, he came
to Panchala and hugged him seven times. Maharaj was very
pleased, for Jhinabhai had served a poor, yet true devotee.
Soon after, Maharaj celebrated the Hutashani festival in
Panchala. Following the festival, Adiba asked for Maharaj’s
forgiveness and requested that he convince Jhinabhai to begin
speaking to her again. Maharaj spoke to Jhinabhai, who accepted
Maharaj’s wish and started speaking to his sister again.
c c c

Jhinabhai fell gravely ill in Junagadh. Maharaj was in
Gadhada when he heard news of his illness. He mounted his
horse and left for Junagadh immediately, arriving in the middle
of the night.
The sound of his horse’s hooves awakened everyone in the
darbar as he entered. News soon spread that Maharaj had
arrived. Maharaj went straight into the main bedroom and sat
on Jhinabhai’s cot, next to his pillow. Seeing Maharaj, Jhinabhai
was overjoyed.
It seemed as if Jhinabhai were nearing his end. Maharaj
asked him whether he wished to ask for anything for his son,
Hathisinh.
“If he becomes your devotee, you will look after him, whether I
ask you to or not,” Jhinabhai replied. “And if he does not become
your devotee, you will not look after him even if I ask you to.
Prahlad’s father never asked God to look after his son, did he!”
Maharaj listened patiently. “Do you wish for anything for
yourself?” he then asked.
38 | Satsang Reader 1

“Please make a mandir here for the devotees of the Sorath
region,” Jhinabhai replied.
Maharaj agreed to Jhinabhai’s request, promising him to
build a mandir in Junagadh. “Which dham do you wish to go
to?” Maharaj then asked. “Badrikashram, Shvetdvip, Vaikunth,
Golok or Akshardham?”
“Maharaj! Please keep me forever in your service, just as you
have kept Bhaguji, Miyaji and Mulji Brahmachari,” Jhinabhai
replied, referring to Maharaj’s personal attendants.
Gangaba, Jhinabhai’s mother, was saddened on hearing her
son’s words, for it dawned upon her that he was nearing his end.
Maharaj comforted her. “Oh, Mother!” he said. “What if I
were to give your Jhina the kingdom of Junagadh?”
“That would be great, Maharaj.”
“And what if I give him the kingdom of Vadodara? Or that
of Indra? How about that of Prakruti-Purush?”
Gangaba was pleased at the prospects Maharaj was making.
Finally, Maharaj proclaimed, “I wish to give him the kingdom
of Akshardham,” Maharaj then said.
With these last words of Maharaj ringing in his ears, Jhinabhai
closed his eyes, forever taking his seat in Akshardham. The date
was 16 December 1828 ce (Magshar sud 10, Samvat 1885).
Everyone from the darbar soon set out to perform Jhinabhai’s
funeral rites. On his way out of the darbar, Maharaj himself
lifted Jhinabhai’s bier. As he came out onto the street, however,
the devotees took it off his shoulders.
Everyone was surprised at the scene, for Maharaj had not
given his shoulder to lift the bier of even his younger brother,
Ichchharambhai.
Muktanand Swami asked Maharaj why he had offered his
shoulder for Jhinabhai.
“Jhinabhai gave his shoulder to lift Kamalshi Vanjha’s cot;
therefore, I gave my shoulder to lift Jhinabhai today,” Maharaj
Bhaktaraj Shri Jhinabhai Darbar | 39

replied. “With Jhinabhai’s bier in hand, I walked double
the number of steps that Jhinabhai had walked while lifting
Kamalshi’s cot.” With these words, Maharaj described the
blessings one earns by sincerely serving the devotees of God.
Jhinabhai was a star amongst Shriji Maharaj’s circle
of devotees. In fact, his name is linked to Maharaj in the
Sarvamangal Stotra, a list of Maharaj’s 1,008 names. Thousands
of devotees around the world remember Jhinabhai to this day
while reciting the Sarvamangal Stotra, for within it they honour
Maharaj by chanting ‘Hemantãrchã-stuti-pritãya Namaha’, a
name that pays tribute to Maharaj’s affection for Jhinabhai.

40 | Satsang Reader 1

5. Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi
He looked simply resplendent. He was young, and his long,
matted hair was tied in a knot at the top of his head. With his
thin body covered in only a loin cloth, he sat on the edge of a
lake in Vartal.
Believing him to be a great yogi, Joban Pagi of Vartal came
close and bowed before him.
“How nice it would be if such a yogi were to stay with us,”
Joban thought.
“I will give you a room,” he promised the yogi. “Please stay
here.”
The yogi replied softly, “I wish to go on a pilgrimage. But I
will come to your home on the way back and stay in your village.”
On enquiry, Joban learnt that the yogi had come to Vartal
from Umreth after having travelled to various parts of the
country.
He offered the yogi a meal. Accepting the offer, the yogi
came to Joban’s home. He cooked food using Joban’s grains,
and offered the food to God before eating.
Soon after, he went to rest at the home of Devkaran Pagi,
one of Joban’s relatives.
The yogi soon left for Bochasan, promising that he would
be back some day.
Years later, the yogi returned to Vartal as Bhagwan
Swaminarayan.
This time, it was at the insistence of Bapujibhai, a devotee
of Vartal, that Maharaj had come, and so Maharaj decided to
stay at Bapujibhai’s home. While there, Maharaj not only gave
discourses, but also sent people into samadhi. Through samadhi,
Maharaj revealed his divine powers, attracting many people.
Bapujibhai had eight sons, Ranchhoddas being one of them.
Ranchhoddas’s wife, Rangbai, served Maharaj with great love
Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi | 41

Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi

and also kept a Brahmin to cook sumptuous meals for him.
Years before, Maharaj had granted Joban Pagi darshan
in Vartal as the yogi, Nilkanth Varni. Joban, however, had
forgotten Maharaj due to the stark evil that had enwrapped
his mind.
Joban Pagi became an notorious bandit. He was such a terror
in Gujarat that not even great kings dared to utter his name.
He roamed hundreds of kilometres committing crimes, even in
broad daylight, yet nobody could catch him.
Joban’s three brothers were Sundar Pagi, Shakaro Pagi and
Dalo Pagi. Part of a very large family, the four brothers were
strongly united.
Joban once called forth his younger brother, Sundar. “A bawa
has come to the Patidar’s enclave,” Joban told him. “Everyone
believes him to be God. Let’s go test his godhood. He has a fine
horse, a Rojho. Go and steal it. We’ll take it to a far-off land. Let’s
see if he can do anything to stop us. Let’s see what kind of God
he really is.”
Sundar blankly refused. “I have had his darshan,” he said.
“He is a man of miracles and he has a radiant appearance. He
surely looks as if he could be God. I dare not toy with such a
great man, for I fear the consequences.”
Joban, however, was eager as ever to test Maharaj. Once,
he woke up in the middle of the night and left for the Patidar’s
enclave. Reaching Bapujibhai’s home, he slowly pushed open the
entrance gate. The gate stuttered, awakening Raiji, a devotee.
Jumping up with sword in hand, Raiji swung open the gate
only to see Joban Pagi, a giant of a man, standing before him.
“We are many brothers, just as you are,” Raiji boomed. “We
are not afraid of you.”
“I have come to see how great your guru really is,” Joban
claimed. “Today, you stand in my way, but what will you do
when Swaminarayan is in another village?”
Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi | 43

Joban soon turned back, disappointed by his failure.
Three or four days later, Maharaj left Vartal. Thereafter, he
visited Vartal many times, nourishing satsang in the village.
Joban Pagi and his brothers soon came in touch with Satsang
through the influence of Maharaj’s sadhus.
Some time later, in January 1810 ce (Posh, Samvat 1866),
Maharaj organized a grand yagna in Dabhan. Thousands
of devotees from all over came to participate. Swift horses
belonging to the noblest of Kathi Darbars filled the village
outskirts. Of these horses, the fame of Bhagwan Swaminarayan’s
Rojho had spread far and wide.
Joban was tempted by Maharaj’s horse. “If I had such a horse,
I could cover many kilometres in a single night,” he thought.
“Looting would be so much easier.”
Maharaj’s horse rested in a stable that was covered by the
thick growth of a banyan tree. Joban approached the stable,
having decided to again attempt to steal the horse. It was a dark
night, quiet all around. Cautiously, Joban entered the stable and
approached Maharaj’s horse. However, as he went to untie the
horse, he saw circles of light coming from somewhere. Looking
up, he saw Bhagwan Swaminarayan in gold-threaded clothes.
Joban jerked his hands back from the horse, shocked. Stepping
back, he retreated and soon disappeared into the darkness.
The following day, there were thousands of devotees seated
in the assembly before Maharaj. There was pin drop silence.
Everyone’s eyes were focused on Maharaj’s murti.
An unknown, edgy looking man soon entered. It was Joban
Pagi. All of a sudden, he jumped onto the stage and fell at
Maharaj’s feet. Maharaj tried to help him up, but he would
not move. He began crying profusely, washing Maharaj’s feet
with his tears.
Slowly, Joban got up. Choked with emotion, he asked
Maharaj to forgive him.
44 | Satsang Reader 1

“O Lord!” he pleaded. “Muktanand Swami had told me much
of your greatness, but doubts remained in my mind. I came
here at night to steal your horse, but before every horse, I had
your darshan.”
He continued, “Lord, I come from a family of disrepute. I
am crooked, worthless and foolish. I was unable to recognize
you for who you are. Oh compassionate one! Please have pity
on me. Please free me of my sins.”
Hearing Joban’s heartfelt words, Maharaj patted his back and
comforted him. He forgave him for his misdeeds and had him take
the vows of satsang, thus drawing him away from his life of crime.
He who had made Gujarat tremble for many years was now
a devotee.
c c c

Now that Joban and his brothers were devotees, they would
travel with Maharaj as bodyguards whenever he came to Gujarat.
Maharaj once came to Vartal on his way back from
Dharampur, bringing Joban Pagi along with him.
“You served me well along the way,” Maharaj told Joban. “I
am pleased with your seva. I wish to grant you a boon.”
“O Lord,” Joban said, with his palms folded. “I already have
you, a kalpavruksh. What more could I want?” Joban paused
before adding, “I have only one desire. Please celebrate the Holi
festival here. Invite thousands of devotees and grace me with
the opportunity to serve.”
Maharaj agreed to Joban’s request. He promised to celebrate
the festival in Vartal. Just before leaving the village, he instructed
Joban to commence preparations.
Soon thereafter, as Holi approached, Maharaj returned
to Vartal in order to fulfil Joban’s wish. Maharaj had invited
devotees from all over to this grand festival.
Nishkulanand Swami had built a beautiful, 12-sided hindolo
that he had set up in Jnanbaug for Maharaj. On the day of
Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi | 45

the festival, he had Maharaj wear resplendent clothes and
ornaments, and sit on the hindolo. Muktanand Swami then
began swinging Maharaj.
Pleased by Joban’s profound love, Maharaj decided to make
the festival truly memorable. He thus assumed 12 forms, granting
darshan to all through each of the hindolo’s 12 sides.
The next day, Maharaj celebrated Rangotsav, also in Jnanbaug.
By throwing heaps of gulal on the sadhus and devotees, and
drenching them in coloured water, he gave them divine joy.
The festival was a truly memorable experience for all who
attended.
c c c

On another occasion, Shriji Maharaj again celebrated Fuldol
in Vartal. He stayed on the first floor of Joban Pagi’s home.
One night, as Maharaj slept, Joban Pagi and Hamir, another
devotee, decided to stay up to guard Maharaj. However, as the
night grew quiet, both Joban and Hamir fell asleep.
Meanwhile, Khodabhai, a devotee from Bhudej, came to ask
for Maharaj’s permission to leave.
Maharaj thought to himself, “The loving devotees of Vartal
won’t let me leave anytime soon. I, too, might as well leave
right now while everyone is asleep.”
Accordingly, Maharaj left with Khodabhai. The two of them
sat in a bullock cart. The cart rattled as it moved, thus startling
Joban awake. Joban called out asking who it was.
“It’s me, Khodabhai!” Maharaj replied, trying to pacify him
and resolve his doubt.
Still drowsy, Joban failed to recognize Maharaj’s voice. He
went back to sleep, thinking nothing of the sounds that had
awakened him. Having fooled Joban, Maharaj soon disappeared
into the darkness of the night.
In the morning, as the village awakened, devotees began
arriving at Joban’s house for Maharaj’s darshan. “Maharaj is
46 | Satsang Reader 1

asleep because he is is tired,” Joban told them, not knowing
that Maharaj had really gone.
A little while later he checked the room. Maharaj’s bed was
empty and he could not be found anywhere. Upset, the devotees
rebuked Joban for allowing Maharaj to slip away.
After some time, they found out that Khodabhai had come
at night, so they went to Budhej to inquire after him. Maharaj
smiled slightly, amused to see the devotees of Vartal in Budhej.
He calmed them and then soon left for Gadhada. From Gadhada,
he returned to Vartal to celebrate the festival of Annakut.
c c c

In April 1822 (Chaitra, Samvat 1878), Maharaj performed
the groundbreaking ceremony for a mandir in Vartal. Devotees
promised Maharaj to offer various services for the mandir. Joban,
for one, had already given his land, yet Maharaj asked for still
more assistance.
“You shut down my business,” Joban replied jokingly. “I
used to bring home riches by committing banditry from here
all the way to Pune. Even on the way, I would rob any good
targets I found. However, how can I offer you money now that
I am out of business?”
Maharaj replied, “Only he who follows dharma according
to my commands is truly great. Being poor doesn’t make a
person insignificant. True greatness lies in observing dharma.
On the other hand, one who spends large sums of money in
charity and makes mandirs, but does not follow dharma never
attains moksha. The wealthy are often egotistical. And so only
the righteous, whether rich or poor, are truly dear to me.”
Maharaj continued, “I am not pleased with someone who
brings me dishonest money. Rather, such a person angers me.
Dharma is my father, and so one who transgresses dharma even
slightly is an enemy of my father. How can such a person ever
be dear to me?”
Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi | 47

Joban listened patiently, nodding his head.
“Anyway,” Maharaj went on, “rather than you giving money,
I am more pleased with you helping physically. Please help me
by willingly offering yourself in seva.”
Accepting Maharaj’s request, Joban and his brothers promised
to help. They also asked that their lineage be blessed and that
their descendants remain closely attached to the mandir.
Construction of the mandir soon began. Maharaj frequently
visited Vartal to oversee the work. On one such visit, he
celebrated Fuldol again in the village, spraying colours on all.
After the festival, he left to bathe with his sadhus.
“Let’s go to your Khodiyar Mata mandir today,” Maharaj
said along the way.
Pagi was pleased on hearing Maharaj’s words. Maharaj
showered gulal powder on Mataji.
On arriving at the mandir, Maharaj stood before Mataji’s
murti and sprinkled gulal on her. “The goddess has become a
devotee today!” Maharaj said.
Mounting his horse, Maharaj then left, stopping to bathe
at a well in Piplad.
c c c

Joban Pagi had once gone to Vaso. Kashiyabhai of Vaso, was
seated on the first floor of his home. He saw Joban approaching
from afar.
“Joban was once dreaded,” he thought. “Gates would shut
and children did not even make a sound when he was around.
Yet, he who once terrified us today humbly walks the streets
of Vaso with a tilak-chandlo on his forehead and a mala around
his neck.”
Kashiyabhai was opposed to Swaminarayan, but he was
amazed at Joban’s transformation. He called Joban out of
curiosity.
“Hey, Joban!” he exclaimed. “What have you seen in
48 | Satsang Reader 1

Swaminarayan that drives you to walk around proudly with
such an obnoxious tilak on your forehead? Has he by chance
performed some miracle by changing a donkey into a cow?”
Joban replied firmly, yet respectfully. “Kashiyabhai,” he said.
“You still wish to see a miracle? Isn’t it a miracle enough that
you’re standing here talking to me? I was the most-wanted
bandit, yet Swaminarayan has made a devotee out of me. He’s
put a kanthi around my neck and a mala in my hand. Doesn’t
that amount to transforming someone who was as wild as a
donkey into someone as humble as a cow?”
Kashiyabhai was dumbfounded. “Yes, yes,” he said, nodding
his head, not knowing what else to say.
c c c

After Maharaj passed away to Akshardham, Joban felt lost,
not knowing what to do. “Why does my body not shatter
without Maharaj?” he thought with anguish. The words of
Maharaj’s sadgurus calmed him. They told him to eat a pinch
of Maharaj’s sacred ashes every day.
With Maharaj in mind, Joban would take a little bit of the
holy ash everyday with his meal. This routine helped him feel
close to Maharaj, keeping his mind at peace.
Once, when Joban sat to eat, his wife served him rotlo and
buttermilk. On not seeing the ash in his dish he asked his wife
to bring some.
“The ash has run out,” his wife replied, somewhat hesitantly.
“What?” Joban replied with a jolt. The shock of his wife’s
words was too much for him. He stopped breathing instantly,
and passed away there and then. Joban’s atma attained the
eternal bliss of Akshardham and proximity of Bhagwan
Swaminarayan.

Bhaktaraj Joban Pagi | 49

Bhaktaraj Jivuba

6. Bhaktaraj Jivuba
“You act like such a great devotee, yet you’ve blemished
the family name! You’re hiding a bawa in the darbar! Where
is he? Speak up!” So saying, Abhal Khachar stormed into his
daughter’s room, sword in hand, ready to swing.
At that time, his daughter, Jivuba, was deep in meditation,
holding a bowl of milk and offering it to Thakorji.
“Set aside this sham,” Abhal Khachar boomed. “If this God
of yours is really true, he’ll come this instant and drink that
milk. Otherwise, my sword is ready to cut you to pieces.”
Suddenly, the room was filled with divine light. God came
forth from the murti, giving darshan as Chaturbhuj Vishnu. He
then began drinking the milk Jivuba was offering.
Dismayed, Abhal Khachar was stunned with fear. His sword
fell to the ground. Upon returning to his senses, he fell at the
feet of God.
Jivuba’s delight knew no bounds, for God himself was
standing before her very eyes. God had come to save her today.
Tears of joy streamed from her eyes. He soon disappeared,
and the divine light that had filled the room merged back
into the murti.
Choked with emotion, Abhal Khachar asked for Jivuba’s
forgiveness. “My dear child,” he pleaded. “Who is this that
you worship?”
Jivuba’s reply was firm, yet polite, “I worship the manifest
form of Purushottam Narayan, the cause of all the avatars,”
she said. “He is all-pervasive, yet he has manifested in a human
form and walks the earth as one of us. It is Sahajanand Swami
himself. You have had his darshan. He is God, the very form of
Parabrahma. If you worship him with a full understanding of
his greatness, you too will win him over.”
“People say a bawa roams the darbar,” Abhal Khachar
Bhaktaraj Jivuba | 51

interrupted. “Who is he? And who drank the milk you were
offering?”
“Bapu,” Jivuba replied, “it is our guru, Sahajanand Swami.”
Jivuba had cleared Abhal Khachar’s doubts. Abhal Khachar
repented for what he had done. He realized that God himself
was living in his darbar, yet he was unable to recognize him.
Furthermore, he had brandished his sword, ready to cut his own
daughter to pieces. Burning with guilt, Abhal Khachar found
comfort in prayer.
Abhal Khachar was the village chieftain of Gadhada. His
daughter, Jivuba, was born in 1785 ce (Samvat 1841). She
was considered lucky to have lived, for all of Abhal Khachar’s
previous children had died prematurely. She was thus named
Jivuba. As she was Abhal Khachar’s eldest child, she was also
called Motiba. Also, as she was born on the day of punam, she
was also known as Punamatiba. She was also known to some
as Jaya.
From a young age, her life was focused on bhakti. She
was also very fond of austerities. Wishing to keep her mind
constantly focused on God and away from the sense pleasures,
she had decided to give up khatras, the six different types of
tastes. Further, she would follow strict vows such as sleeping
on the floor and staying at least 20 feet away from males not
closely related to her. Also, she would constantly stay engaged
in serving God, wishing to please him.
When Jivuba came of age, Abhal Khachar began looking
for a virtuous young man for her marriage. As soon as Jivuba
found out, she refused point-blank.
“Bapu!” she said. “I don’t want to get married. All I wish to
do in my life is worship God.”
According to the traditions of Kathi Darbars, all women
when they reach the appropriate age must get married. Abhal
Khachar knew of Jivuba’s intense bhakti right from when she
52 | Satsang Reader 1

was a child, yet, sticking to tradition, he convinced her to get
married. Giving in to her father’s insistence, Jivuba soon married
Hathiya Patgar, son of Amara Patgar of Kundal.
After her marriage, Jivuba went to live with her in-laws.
Raibai, her mother-in-law, was a simple woman, and so Jivuba
told her of her true desire. “I wish to remain celibate and worship
God,” Jivuba gently requested.
Raibai understood Jivuba’s sentiments. She convinced her
son to give his wife permission to worship God and dedicate
herself to God. Jivuba duly received a letter of permission from
her husband and returned to Gadhada.
On seeing his daughter return home, Abhal Khachar was
furious. Flushed with rage, he came forth to beat her, but was
silenced when he saw the permission letter in her hands. Abhal
Khachar was left speechless.
Jivuba was now free to spend day and night engaged in
bhakti to God.
c c c

Bhagwan Swaminarayan had entered Gujarat and had come
to Sorath after having travelled across the length and breadth
of India as Nilkanth Varni, spreading dharma.
Jivuba, a great soul from the past, had developed a divine
vision that allowed her to constantly have Maharaj’s darshan
as he made his way towards Gujarat.
During his travels, Maharaj once came to the banks of the
Unmatt Ganga, the River Ghela, in Gadhada. The all-knowing
Maharaj wanted to fulfil Jivuba’s wish by granting her darshan.
He thus sent a message to her in the darbar saying he had
arrived. For years, Jivuba had been craving for the darshan of
the manifest form of God, and so she was simply delighted on
hearing the news that he had come.
Jivuba and her younger sister, Lalita, or Laduba, secretly ran off
to the banks of the River Ghela for Maharaj’s darshan. There they
Bhaktaraj Jivuba | 53

saw Maharaj. The sisters felt peace just on having his darshan.
They requested Maharaj to come to the darbar. He agreed.
When Abhal Khachar came to know, he became angry and
ran to beat his his daughter. However, he stopped on having
Maharaj’s divine darshan.
c c c

Abhal Khachar was originally a follower of Sadguru
Ramanand Swami, and so he was aware that Ramanand Swami
had appointed Sahajanand Swami as his successor and the head of
the Sampradaya. He had gone for his first darshan of Sahajanand
Swami when Maharaj was in Kariyani, yet, at the time, he knew
nothing of Maharaj’s greatness. He was unaware that this was
the very Maharaj his daughter worshipped. Instead, he saw
Maharaj as just another mahant or bawa.
Soon, however, Maharaj came to stay in Gadhada. Abhal
Khachar began serving him, now with an understanding of
Maharaj’s greatness. Jaya, Lalita and their younger brother,
Dada Khachar, were also constantly in Maharaj’s seva.
Won over by the family’s bhakti, Maharaj decided to make
Gadhada his home. Accordingly, he returned to stay in the
village after celebrating festivals and completing his vicharan.
c c c

Seated in a chariot, Jivuba was once coming from Kariyani
to Gadhada. On her way, soon after she had left Kariyani, she
saw a sadhu seated beneath a tree. She sent her charioteer to
find out what was wrong with the sadhu.
On asking, the charioteer learnt that it was Akhandanand
Swami. He was seated underneath the tree because he was
stricken with diarrhoea and had no energy to walk.
Unable to bear the sight of Maharaj’s sadhu suffering, Jivuba
came down from her chariot and laid a soft blanket in it. She
then told the charioteer to seat the sadhu inside and ensure that
he reached Gadhada safely.
54 | Satsang Reader 1

The charioteer did as he was told, picking up the ill sadhu.
Jivuba, on the other hand, walked to Gadhada with her
attendant. Jivuba had no shoes, so she had to walk barefoot,
despite the intense heat. Being a princess, she was unaccustomed
to walking in such a manner, and so she was hurt by the many
thorns and rough stones along the way. Despite this, she had
dropped concern for her own well-being, as her efforts were for
the sake of serving one of Maharaj’s sadhus.
Maharaj was very pleased when he came to know of Jivuba’s
selfless seva. “Serving my sadhu is as good as serving me,” he
remarked.
c c c

Jivuba had firm faith that Maharaj was the supreme God,
Purushottam Narayan.
Jivuba was inclined towards bhakti. With Maharaj’s grace
and through his association, she was also enlightened with
spiritual knowledge.
Her knowledge once shone through particularly well when
Maharaj sent Ladudan Barot, a royal poet, who had recently
become a devotee, to convince Jivuba and her sister to get
married and live according to the rules of householders. Ladudan
Barot spoke to the sisters, but Jivuba replied by telling the
poet about the futility of the world and its affairs. She further
explained to him that one’s body is nothing but a container
full of rotting waste, nothing worth being attracted towards.
Jivuba’s description was so detailed that it left Ladudan Barot
disgusted, feeling as if he would vomit. Jivuba’s words convinced
him of the world’s futility and he subsequently renounced the
world to become a sadhu. He was named Brahmanand Swami.
Jivuba passed away to Akshardham on 26 May 1860 (Jeth
sud 6, Samvat 1916), with thoughts of Maharaj forever dancing
in her mind and heart.
Bhaktaraj Jivuba | 55

Swami Nirgundasji

7. Swami Nirgundasji
A peaceful darkness had pervaded the night air of Vadodara.
All was calm. Slight noises, however, could be heard coming
from behind the mandir, in the pradakshina area. The clock
struck 4 a.m. The pujari had come to the mandir for mangala
arti. Taking a look behind the mandir, he saw Shastri
Yagnapurushdasji, an honourable sadhu and a great scholar,
talking with 18-year-old Jethabhai of Pij.
“Goodness, you’ve been here since yesterday evening!” the
pujari exclaimed, looking at Yagnapurushdasji. “You’re still here
talking? You seem to be quite passionate about satsang!”
Yagnapurushdas answered with just a smile. He and Jethabhai
both then went to bathe.
Jethabhai had come to Vadodara to study at Kala Bhavan
Technical Institute. He had started coming to the mandir every
day after having heard much about the Akshar-Purushottam
upasana from Govindbhai Master, Shivshankarbhai,
Ullasrambhai and other devotees. It was here that he came
in touch with Shastri Yagnapurushdasji.
The Satpurush is always in search of true spiritual seekers.
Jethabhai, however, was not just a seeker; he was also a great
soul. His spiritual endeavours of past lives had helped foster in
him affection for Yagnapurushdasji.
He soon began spending more and more time with him.
Once, spending the entire night talking, Yagnapurushdasji
kindled within Jethabhai firm faith in the eternal forms of
Akshar and Purushottam. He also explained to him that Bhagatji
Maharaj was the manifest form of Akshar-Purushottam and the
gateway to moksha. Yagnapurushdasji’s words were authentic,
for they were quoted from the Vachanamrut. Listening to
Yagnapurushdasji, opened Jethabhai’s eyes.
c c c

Swami Nirgundasji | 57

Jethabhai was born to a Patidar family in the village of Pij,
near Nadiad, on 25 May 1876 (Jeth sud 2, Samvat 1932). From
a young age, he seemed uninterested in living a worldly life.
Instead, he preferred to spend time at the mandir and with
sadhus.
Shastri Yogeshwardas and Sadguru Jagatpavandas would
often come to Pij from nearby Dabhan. Through their
association, Jethabhai grew closer to Satsang. Moreover,
through the association of Muljibhai, a devotee, he came to
understand Bhagatji Maharaj’s greatness. Soon after, Bhagatji
Maharaj appeared before him, granting him darshan in the Pij
mandir. After moving to Vadodara for higher studies, Jethabhai
grew even closer to Satsang.
Jethabhai first had Bhagatji Maharaj’s darshan in October
1895 (Kartik, Samvat 1952). With him was Ganpatbhai, son
of Mahashankarbhai Dave of Bharuch.
The two travelled by boat. During their journey, however,
the waters suddenly became very rough. The boat’s captain
gravely eyed the waters. “There seems to be no escape,” he said.
Jethabhai began praying to Bhagatji Maharaj and assured
everyone that Bhagatji would protect them. The group began
singing kirtans. Within moments, the tide settled, putting
everyone at ease. With the waters turning calm, the group
safely reached Mahuva.
On reaching Mahuva, Jethabhai offered dandvats to Bhagatji
Maharaj from the village outskirts so as not to be seen. The
sadhus and brahmacharis of Mahuva mandir were wary of those
who followed Bhagatji, and never liked people offering dandvats
to him.
As the days passed, Jethabhai took every possible opportunity
to serve Bhagatji and to listen to his discourses. He would go to
Bhagatji’s home early each morning for spiritual discussions before
accompanying him to the River Malan to bathe. Throughout the
58 | Satsang Reader 1

day, he would also listen to Bhagatji’s discourses at the mandir.
After some time, Jethabhai returned to Pij.
After returning home, Jethabhai once again came to Mahuva
with a group of devotees from Pij. This time, however, he
developed a fever. While sick, he rested on the mandir’s upper
floor.
Bhagatji Maharaj once came to his bedside to grant him
darshan. He put his hand on Jethabhai’s head and began his
talks. Jokingly, he told Jethabhai, also known as Jethalal, “Jetha
and Lal. Lal means atma. Become atmarup and worship God.”
Bhagatji’s loving words pleased Jethabhai.
The fever soon subsided, yet Jethabhai still felt very weak. “If
Bhagatji embraces me, I will definitely feel better,” he thought.
With this notion in mind, Jethabhai got out of bed and walked
to Bhagatji’s home all alone.
When he reached, Bhagatji was lying down, yet he instantly
awoke upon seeing him.
Reading Jethabhai’s thoughts, Bhagatji said to him, “I want
to make you better today. Come, let’s meet.” Then, Bhagatji
embraced him. Jethabhai was overwhelmed with joy. Today,
Bhagatji had fulfilled his wish.
c c c

At Bhagatji Maharaj’s command, Jethabhai took initiation as
a parshad on 17 April 1897 (Chaitra sud 15, Samvat 1953). Now
known as Jetha Bhagat, he began serving as Acharya Viharilalji
Maharaj’s personal assistant, answering his letters and helping
with his literary works. His efficiency, etiquette, and detachment
soon made him a favourite of the acharya. The same year that
Jetha Bhagat took diksha, the acharya appointed him as kothari
of Mumbai mandir. Thereafter, he also served as kothari at the
mandirs in Vadodara, Junagadh and Gadhada.
When Bhagatji Maharaj fell ill in Mahuva and wished to
revert to Akshardham he wrote a letter to Jetha Bhagat in
Swami Nirgundasji | 59

Mumbai. Learning of Bhagatji’s illness, he immediately left
for Mahuva.
Once Jetha Bhagat reached Mahuva, Bhagatji kept him in
his personal seva. Jetha Bhagat served Bhagatji for a total of 23
days, earning his grace.
Before passing away to Akshardham, Bhagatji Maharaj
bestowed a boon upon him, “You shall forever be blessed by
God and his holy Sadhu,” he said.
Around this time, Yagnapurushdasji was studying in Rajkot.
Swami Jaga Bhagat, one of Gunatitanand Swami’s foremost
disciples, resided in nearby Junagadh. Yagnapurushdasji wished
that Jetha Bhagat come to Junagadh to benefit from Jaga
Bhagat’s discourses.
As it was Yagnapurushdasji’s wish, Jetha Bhagat gave up his
post as kothari in Mumbai and came to Junagadh. For six months,
he stayed with Jaga Bhagat and listened to his discourses. He
also served in the mandir’s treasury and listened to the discourses
of Sadguru Balmukunddasji, Sadguru Dharmaswarupdasji,
Sadguru Narayandasji and Sadguru Krishnacharandasji.
Jetha Bhagat had already earned Bhagatji Maharaj’s blessings.
Now, by serving at Junagadh mandir, he had also earned Jaga
Bhagat’s blessings. By the grace of his guru, Bhagatji Maharaj, he
developed a firm conviction in the Akshar-Purushottam upasana.
c c c

Yagnapurushdasji’s fame spread far and wide within the
Swaminarayan Sampradaya. Unable to bear his growing
influence, a group of sadhus convinced the acharya to turn
against him. The acharya, in turn, began showing great disregard
towards Yagnapurushdasji.
The wrath of sadhus in Vartal towards Yagnapurushdasji
continued to grow. Seeing the increasingly tense situation,
reputed senior devotees, including Krishnaji Ada, a great
devotee who had earned Gunatitanand Swami’s grace, insisted
60 | Satsang Reader 1

that Yagnapurushdasji and his sadhus leave Vartal. Taking
their advice, Yagnapurushdasji and his sadhus soon left Vartal.
Kothari Jetha Bhagat, unable to part with Shastriji Maharaj,
also joioned him soon thereafter.
Jetha Bhagat took bhagvati diksha on 29 January 1906 (Maha
sud 5 – Vasant Panchami – VS 1962), at the hands of Acharya
Kunjavihariprasadji Maharaj of Vadhwan. Jetha Bhagat’s new
name was Nirgundas Swami.
c c c

The golden age for the spread of Akshar-Purushottam
upasana had begun. Yet, the early days were filled with
countless obstacles. Nirgundas Swami had become a constant
partner to Swamishri in tackling these obstacles. He had
kicked aside his dignified position, power and grandeur within
the Sampradaya and firmly resolved to please Swamishri by
propagating the pure upasana. Bhagatji Maharaj and Jaga
Bhagat had strengthened him with spiritual understanding,
and so despite the opposition, threats and insults coming from
all sides, he remained happy and unflinching.
“Nobody ever had the courage to tell me to wear saffron,”
Nirgun Swami would often say. “However, Swamishri told me,
‘Your intellect, knowledge and ability will shine only when you
accept the saffron robes, but not in white!’ Those few words
stuck in my mind and I soon took initiation.”
Nirgun Swami’s strict demeanour was awe-inspiring. As long
as he was in Vartal, no hostile sadhu could ever speak against
Jaga Bhagat or Pragji Bhagat. In fact, they did not even have
the courage to utter the sounds, ‘Ja’ or ‘Pra’; such was Nirgun
Swami’s influence.
However, before Shastriji Maharaj, such a powerful sadhu
as Nirgun Swami had become a humble servant. He would dig
mandir foundation pits, go from village to village begging for
alms, look after devotees and take up many other such seva.
Swami Nirgundasji | 61

In doing so, he would set aside concern for himself and serve
enthusiastically with an understanding of the glory of Satsang.
He was driven by vigour to push forth for the sake of
upasana and for Swamishri, even if it were to cost him his life.
Accordingly, he would often sing the following couplet:
‘Re rang sahit Harine ratie, re hãk vãge pãchhã nav hathie;
Brahmãnand kahe tyã mari matie, re shir sãte Natvar ne varie.”
Meaning: “We worship Hari (God) with full joy and abandon,
When the call comes we will never fall back.
Brahmanand says that if need be, we will fight on to the death.”
Nirgun Swami was passionate about spreading knowledge
of Bhagwan Swaminarayan, Akshar-Purushottam, AtmaParamatma, Brahma-Parabrahma, and of Shastriji Maharaj as
the manifest form of Maharaj and Swami. He would speak
unfailingly and enthusiastically, using references from the
Vachanamrut, Gita and Bhagvat to inspire both satsangis and
new aspirants. He also often wrote long letters to devotees,
nourishing them spiritually and helping them in every way.
Nirgundas Swami always accompanied Swamishri during
festivals, parayans and assemblies held specially to strengthen
the Akshar-Purushottam upasana within devotees. He would
speak relentlessly, for he had a good grasp of the principles of the
Vachanamrut. His style of explaining them was extraordinary.
Swamishri also kept Nirgun Swami at his side when it came
to making major decisions regarding the Satsang fellowship
and its management. Nirgun Swami was also in charge of the
Sanstha’s government-related work, as he was never hesitant
when meeting important officials.
Moreover, he was an expert at arranging festivals and looking
after the devotees who attended. During festivals, he would go
out on rounds throughout the night, a lantern in hand, checking
whether each devotee had received a blanket. If it so happened
that a devotee had taken more than one blanket, Nirgun Swami
62 | Satsang Reader 1

would take the extra blanket and give it to those in need. He
would also look after devotees who arrived late at night.
One of his unique virtues was his interest and involvement
in the lives devotees. He was shaken by any pain a devotee
ever had to undergo. Understanding the greatness of Shastriji
Maharaj’s devotees, he would involve himself in their problems,
believing their problems to be his own. He would help them
in any way possible, giving them stability and peace of mind.
c c c

Every year, Nirgun Swami also travelled outside Gujarat
to Khandesh to spread satsang. The devotees of Khandesh,
immigrants from Gujarat, were very loving. Realizing the extent
of their affection, Nirgun Swami would explain to them Shastriji
Maharaj’s greatness.
On 5 February 1919 (Maha sud 5, Samvat 1975), Nirgun
Swami arranged for the Vasant Panchami festival to be celebrated
in Khandesh. Swamishri, as well as many other sadhus and
devotees, attended the festival.
The devotees from the surrounding villages were simple,
innocent people and they saw great divinity in Swamishri.
Pleased with their devotion for him, Swamishri showered them
with divine bliss.
The devotees of Khandesh were engrossed in Swamishri due
to Nirgun Swami’s constant efforts. However, despite his own
greatness, Nirgun Swami never drew devotees towards himself,
but always instructed them to attach themselves to Swamishri.
Swamishri, on the other hand, would often take the
opportunity to reveal Nirgun Swami’s greatness to devotees.
Nirgun Swami once gave a Khandesh devotee a boon that a child
would be born to him. The devotee later came to Swamishri,
asking him for the same boon again.
“Nirgun Swami has already given you the boon, hasn’t he?”
Swamishri replied. “His boon will bear fruit, without a doubt.”
Swami Nirgundasji | 63

Swamishri’s words helped the devotees of Khandesh understand
Nirgundasji’s true glory.
c c c

Numerous activities would be arranged in each of the mandirs.
Moreover, Swamishri’s vicharan was unceasing – one day he would
be in Charotar (Gujarat) and the following day in Saurashtra.
Satsang activities continued without halt. During such activities,
Nirgun Swami would always be by Shastriji Maharaj’s side.
If anybody ever fell back from satsang, Nirgun Swami would
reach out to him without fail. With his talks based on the
Vachanamrut and other satsang shastras, he would speak to him
of the greatness of Purushottam and of Shastriji Maharaj, the
manifest form of Akshar-Purushottam. However, never would
he allow someone to fall from satsang.
c c c

At Swamishri’s behest, Nirgun Swami once went with
a devotee named Ishwarbhai Prabhudas Patel to bring
Radharamanprasad, Acharya Lakshmiprasadji Maharaj’s son,
from Chhapaiya. However, Radharamanprasad’s sister refused
to let him go, so Nirgun Swami and Ishwarbhai turned back.
As he was returning to the train station, Nirgun Swami
fell off a horse. He suffered injury to his abdomen and head,
causing intense pain.
The village people treated him, but his pain would not lessen.
In fact, the pain was so severe that he truly thought he would
pass away. But then he thought of Swamishri, wishing to have
his darshan one last time. He offered prayers with sincerity.
Soon, Shriji Maharaj appeared before him seated on his mare
Manki, with a small silver vessel full of milk in his hand. He
passed his hand over Nirgun Swami, and then made him drink
the milk. Drinking Maharaj’s nectar-like milk, having his darshan
and experiencing his touch relieved Nirgun Swami’s pain.
The following morning, Nirgun Swami had completely
64 | Satsang Reader 1

recovered. He left for Kashi with Ishwarbhai and Shrijiswarupdas,
one of Shastriji Maharaj’s sadhus. From there, he returned to
Gujarat.
c c c

Formerly, as kothari in Mumbai, Nirgun Swami had explained
Shastriji Maharaj’s unmatched greatness to Motilal Fojdar,
Ramji Keshav and other respected devotees. After joining
with Swamishri, Nirgun Swami continued his efforts to help
Satsang grow in Mumbai. The number of devotees in the city
began to increase due to Nirgun Swami’s inspirational letters
and repeated visits to the city. Swamishri accompanied Nirgun
Swami on many such visits. Nirgun Swami was always willing
to help these devotees, young and old, in times of need, and so
they greatly respected him alongside Swamishri.
By nature, Nirgun Swami was stern. If work was not done
properly, he would become cross and, if necessary, would even
use harsh words. However, he would quickly forgive and forget,
never holding grudges. Moreover, if he was ever at fault, he
would not hesitate in the least to ask for forgiveness. In this
way, despite being stern, he was also easy going.
Once, some devotees asked Swamishri, “What pleases
Maharaj and Swami at the present time?”
“They are pleased by the building of Akshar-Purushottam
mandirs,” Swamishri replied. “Maharaj will make brahmarup
and take to Akshardham anyone who offers even the smallest
seva towards building such mandirs.”
Nirgun Swami then added, “Along with building mandirs,
they are also pleased if the greatness of both Bhagatji Maharaj
and his present form, Shastriji Maharaj, are propagated.”
Everyone was pleased upon hearing Nirgun Swami’s reply,
for it made evident that his every pore was filled with an
understanding of Shastriji Maharaj’s greatness.
c c c

Swami Nirgundasji | 65

Aside from his unceasing vicharan and letters to devotees
in India, Nirgun Swami also began writing of the greatness of
Akshar-Purushottam and Shastriji Maharaj in a stream of letters
to East Africa, where Harmanbhai and Maganbhai, two devotees,
had established Satsang. Nirgun Swami’s letters were not just a
few pages long, but were sometimes up to 100 pages in length.
Moreover, his letters, written to various devotees, were organized
well and written point-to-point, clearly, without scratches and
strictly according to the Vachanamrut and other scriptures.
Seeing Nirgun Swami’s affection for them, the devotees of
Africa would enthusiastically read his letters, contemplate on
his words and put the teachings into practice.
When people questioned his unflagging efforts, he would
reply in his naturally forceful way, saying that the letters should
undoubtedly continue as they pleased the devotees of Africa.
Moreover, he would say that it was his great fortune to have
this opportunity to serve the devotees in such a way.
Although Nirgun Swami was very highly respected by the
devotees, he never harboured any expectations. A devotee from
Africa once sent him a new, woollen blanket, hoping he would
keep it for himself. Nirgun Swami, however, immediately gave
the rich blanket to Shastriji Maharaj, hoping he would use it.
Devotees once sent a few shillings to Nirgun Swami by postal
order, with a letter telling him to use the money for postage
since he wrote to Africa so often. He was displeased on reading
the letter. He immediately gave the postal order to the mandir
treasury and sent a letter of sweet rebuke to the devotees, “Never
send money for me. Anything I need is provided through the
mandir.”
Nirgun Swami’s tireless efforts had given impetus to the
spread of satsang, and so his fame quickly began spreading
throughout the Sampradaya. Despite this, he always bowed
before Yogiji Maharaj’s innate saintliness and humility.
66 | Satsang Reader 1

“Recognize Yogiji Maharaj for who he is,” Nirgun Swami would
often say. “He is not one who can be recognized so easily.”
c c c

Despite being such a respected sadhu, he would always find
and engage in even menial seva. If there was ever any rubbish,
filth or disarray anywhere in the mandir complex, he would
reach there immediately and enthusiastically set things in order.
Once, preparations were under way for a festival in Bochasan.
Shastriji Maharaj’s glance fell upon a big pile of rubbish that had
come up in one corner of the mandir. Seeing Swamishri looking
towards the trash, Nirgun Swami pulled up his dhotiyu, took a
shovel in hand and began removing the dirt himself. When he
began work, it was morning. By evening, he had moved many
cartfuls of rubbish all by himself.
c c c

Nirgun Swami’s unmatched management skills and devotion
towards his guru shone through once again during Shastriji
Maharaj’s 80th birthday celebrations in Bochasan, as well as
during the Suvarna Mahotsav in Atladara.
Soon after, however, he fell ill. He was brought to Mumbai
for treatment, yet his illness and the resulting weakness he
suffered left him feeling constantly uneasy. Swamishri would
give him courage, yet Nirgun Swami prayed to him as if his
end were near. “Please forgive me if I have ever done anything
wrong or if I have ever not been able to act according to your
wishes. Now take me to Akshardham.”
Swamishri was choked with emotion on hearing Nirgun
Swami’s prayers. Today, Swamishri’s right hand, an idol of valour
and a warrior for Satsang lay helpless in bed.
“We still have to do the arti of Gadhada mandir,” Swamishri
said, passing his hand over Nirgun Swami. “Keep courage.
Maharaj will make you better.”
Soon after, Nirgun Swami’s condition worsened. He was
Swami Nirgundasji | 67

taken to the village of Pen, a short distance from Mumbai, for
treatment. He did not wish in the least to be separated from
Swamishri, as he knew these were his last moments. Yet, it was
Swamishri’s wish that he go to Pen, and accordingly Nirgun
Swami prepared himself for the trip.
The day Nirgun Swami was to leave, Swamishri came to
him. He put his hand on Nirgun Swami’s head before stroking
it over the rest of his body in blessing. “Maharaj will make you
better quickly,” Swamishri said. “We will meet later, when you
are well and better.”
Swamishri looked long and hard at Nirgun Swami. Nirgundas
Swami had been Swamishri’s partner, his shield in times of
joy and sorrow, honour and insult. He was a revered sadhu
throughout the Satsang, and as courageous as a lion. Yet, this
was to be their last moment together. Nirgun Swami was taken
to an ambulance, which soon left for Pen. Once the ambulance
had left, Swamishri went into his room and sat on the floor. The
atmosphere was gloomy.
Being away from both Swamishri and the Satsang
community, Nirgun Swami’s health declined further. Finally,
with Swamishri’s permission, he was brought to Anand. Here,
continuous prayers and discourses were begun before him.
Unable to bear being away from Swamishri, he would
frequently tell devotees, “Convey my Jay Swaminarayan to
Swamishri. Please ask him to grant me darshan just once.” In
return, whenever he received word from Swamishri, his face
would blossom with happiness.
Swamishri was in Ahmedabad at the time. He too fell ill,
while Nirgun Swami’s condition deteriorated still further in
Anand. Nirgun Swami began uttering Shastriji Maharaj’s and
Bhagatji Maharaj’s names without pause. On Tuesday, 30 May
1950 (Jeth sud 14, VS 2006), he passed away, forever taking
his place in Maharaj’s seva in Akshardham.
68 | Satsang Reader 1

From the start, Nirgun Swami had fostered faith in AksharPurushottam within seekers residing both in and out of the
country. He was a powerful individual and an idol of affection,
always loyally standing by Shastriji Maharaj’s devotees. He was
a partner for the afflicted and a saviour for the poor. His part in
the development of Satsang was immense, instilling thousands
of devotees with firm faith in Akshar-Purushottam.

Swami Nirgundasji | 69

Swami Yagnapriyadasji

8. Swami Yagnapriyadasji
It was a dharmashala for sadhus that had been sanctified
by Bhagwan Swaminarayan. As Ashabhai looked inside, he
saw that it was packed full with a crowd of devotees. He was
stunned to see such a large crowd in such a small place. At the
centre of the crowd a radiant individual was narrating the story
of King Bharat. Ashabhai’s eyes were glued to the scene. He
stood frozen.
A friend who had come with him shook him back to his
senses, telling him it was no use standing there. Acting on his
friend’s advice, Ashabhai dragged himself away. Yet even after
having left, his mind remained fixed to the scene. It had been
his first darshan of Shastriji Maharaj.
The brothers, Ashabhai and Ishwarbhai, lived in Sadhi, a
village near Vadodara. They were true spiritual seekers, quite
wealthy, and managed a Ramanandi mandir in their village.
Every Punam, Ashabhai would go to Dakor for darshan of
Ranchhodray.
One night, Ranchhodray granted him darshan in a dream
and told him, “If you wish for your liberation, take refuge in
Bhagwan Swaminarayan. At present, he is manifest and moves
about within Satsang.”
Some time later, a few Swaminarayan sadhus came to Sadhi.
Ashabhai went for their darshan and expressed a wish to serve
them a meal.
He soon took vartman from the group’s head sadhu,
Dharmanandandas.
A short time thereafter, Ashabhai went to Vartal for darshan.
He was delighted on seeing the extraordinary mandir in Vartal
as well as its sadhus and devotees. Moreover, it was here
that he had Shastriji Maharaj’s darshan again. Ashabhai was
overwhelmed by an experience of inner peace.
Swami Yagnapriyadasji | 71

Soon after, Shastriji Maharaj came to Sadhi. During his stay,
Ashabhai got to know him better. Furthermore, he developed
affection for Swamishri, also acquiring faith in his words. Being
with him settled his qualms and convinced him that, through
Swamishri, he had attained moksha. He bowed his head before
Swamishri’s lotus feet.
In a short time, Ashabhai accepted the truth of the AksharPurushottam upasana. Thereafter, as instructed by Swamishri,
he offered his services in the preparations for the pratishtha of
the Akshar-Purushottam murtis at the mandir in Vadhwan.
c c c

To ease his financial difficulties, Ashabhai had purchased farm
lands in Chhota Udepur. Although Swamishri had discouraged
him from going, Ashabhai could not resist this temptation
because of the potential financial gain it offered.
“If you believe me to be great, please do not go,” Swamishri
said. “Your problems will go away. I will slip them right under
my cushion.”
Ashabhai’s heart was pierced by Swamishri’s loving words.
He felt his pains being removed before his very eyes. He obeyed
Swamishri’s wish, which brought Ashabhai closer than ever to him.
c c c

Shastriji Maharaj’s saintliness and diligence led certain
elements of the Sampradaya to treat him with great hostility, .
Very much against his own will, Swamishri was forced to leave
Vartal mandir. Ashabhai was witness to his departure. Swamishri
was a highly respected sadhu, a shining star amongst the
Sampradaya’s thousands of sadhus. How could the devotees put
up with his exile? Seeing that Swamishri was in need, Ashabhai,
as well as many other devotees, stepped in to help, putting
themselves, their families, their wealth and their property at
his disposal.
Slowly but surely, Swamishri began organizing festivals and
72 | Satsang Reader 1

parayans. Ashabhai and Ishwarbhai would go for Swamishri’s
darshan on all such occasions. Moreover, for the ongoing
construction of the mandirs in Bochasan and Sarangpur, they
would offer their all. Whenever Swamishri required money for the
mandirs, he would request Ashabhai and Ishwarbhai, who would
do whatever they could to get Swamishri the amount he needed.
To avoid controversy and conflict with the devotees of the
Vartal sect residing in Sadhi, Swamishri rarely visited the village.
However, as a result, Swamishri’s devotees living in Sadhi were
deprived of the opportunity to personally serve him. Soon, they
decided to move elsewhere.
During a festival in Bochasan, they asked Swamishri where
they should purchase new land to settle. Swamishri agreed with
their decision to move and asked them to purchase land on Ajva
Road, near Vadodara.
Soon after, Swamishri himself took a bullock cart and went
with the devotees to see the land. Swamishri had always been
especially interested in land matters. Moreover, he had great
affection for the devotees and thus helped and guided them in
their personal affairs.
With Swamishri’s permission, Ashabhai purchased land in
Jesangpura. Soon after, with Swamishri’s guidance, he also
bought land near Radhu. Swamishri then had various devotees
purchase chunks of this land from Ashabhai, leaving Ashabhai
with a profit, which he later donated to Sarangpur mandir. In
this way, Swamishri often encouraged devotees to work together
in farming, hoping to both benefit them and the mandir, and
bring devotees closer to each other.
c c c

Ashabhai once wished to invite some devotees to his farm in
Sayajipura for a simple feast of ponk. Swamishri, however, asked
that he arrange a grand festival instead. Ashabhai agreed, so
Swamishri sent invitations to all devotees.
Swami Yagnapriyadasji | 73

Time was short, but since Ishwarbhai had good contacts
with the government depot in Vadodara, he was quickly able
to acquire tents, decorative cloth, carpets, large pots and pans,
and other necessities. He rented 40 bullock carts to bring
the materials to Sayajipura. As instructed by Swamishri, the
brothers tore down five old houses on the farm overnight and,
in place of the houses, set up tents.
Big land owners of Gujarat, officials of Vadodara and
thousands of devotees came for the festival, during which
Swamishri discoursed and elaborated on wonderful incidents
relating to devotion and spiritual knowledge from the Bhagvat
and Satsangijivan. Moreover, Nirgundas Swami, Mahapurushdas
Swami and Vignandas Swami, three of Swamishri’s sadhus,
spoke on the greatness of a true sadhu.
Ashabhai and Ishwarbhai had given their all towards making
the sadhus and devotees feel welcome. Dining arrangements
were lavish. Devotees were given patlos to sit on and German
silver dishes to eat from. The dining area was also decorated with
rangoli and filled with the fragrance of incense sticks. Devotees
were served new delicacies every day.
The festival concluded on the full moon day of Punam. The
brothers performed pujan of Swamishri and his sadhus, did
arti, presented dhotiyas and offered a donation. Throughout
the festival, the sadhus and devotees witnessed Ashabhai’s
extraordinary faith and love for Satsang. Once the festival was
over, the devotees parted, singing Ashabhai’s praises.
Soon after, another marvellous festival, inspired by Ashabhai
and Ishwarbhai, was held in Koyli. Here, the brothers honoured
Swamishri by receiving him on a royal seat placed atop an
elephant. They also organized a month-long parayan in Radhu,
during which the entire Satsang fellowship was invited.
c c c

Ashabhai and Ishwarbhai worked hard on their farms. They
74 | Satsang Reader 1

reaped good harvests, but were often struck by natural calamities
that sometimes left them with a loss and deep in debt. Yet, they
never asked Swamishri to solve their problems, for they always
believed that he was only testing their faith. Others, including
Nirgundas Swami, would appeal to Swamishri on their behalf.
In response, Swamishri would simply smile.
The murti-pratishtha of Sarangpur mandir was fast
approaching. Around this time, Swamishri came to Radhu
along with Ashabhai, Ishwarbhai and Motibhai, another leading
devotee.
Ashabhai lived on a farm he owned in Purushottampura, about
three kilometres from Radhu. At his home in Purushottampura,
he kept his entire year’s stock of cotton, grams, wheat and other
crops.
However, while he was in Radhu with Swamishri, his young
son accidentally dropped a burning matchstick on a large pile
of cotton in their home in Purushottampura, creating a fire that
quickly spread. Before anyone knew it, the fire had engulfed the
entire home, as well as all of Ashabhai’s possessions. Although
everyone in the house escaped safely, nobody could take anything
with them other than the clothes they were wearing.
News of the fire soon reached Radhu. Saddened, Shastriji
Maharaj and his sadhus passed the news to Ashabhai. Despite
the devastating news, with Swamishri’s grace and the spiritual
perspective Swamishri had bestowed, Ashabhai was not too
grieved by the news.
With Swamishri’s permission, he went to Purushottampura.
On arrival, he saw that his entire property had been reduced
to ashes. Anyone else would have been heartbroken at such a
devastating sight. Ashabhai, however, saw this as God’s test
for him.
With no belongings left, Ashabhai and his family had to ask
for khichdi from Radhu to eat.
Swami Yagnapriyadasji | 75

The following day, Shastriji Maharaj came to Purushottampura.
Deeply pained on seeing the damage, he comforted Ashabhai
and Ishwarbhai.
As if this test was not enough, Shastriji Maharaj remarked,
“This is none other than an obstacle for our work. We had
come here to get money for the murtis required from Jaipur for
Sarangpur mandir; now this trouble has arisen.”
Hearing Shastriji Maharaj’s words, anyone else would have
lost their patience on someone asking for money at such a time.
Ashabhai, however, forever saw Shastriji Maharaj as divine.
Moreover, he had an intense desire to follow Swamishri’s every
wish, even in the toughest and most difficult of times. How
could he let go of such an opportunity?
Thinking in this way, he immediately told Motibhai to get
the necessary amount for the murtis from a nearby money lender.
As soon as Motibhai brought the money, Ashabhai offered it to
Swamishri, who looked at him with surprise. Pleased with this
extraordinary sacrifice, Swamishri embraced both brothers, as
well as Motibhai.
“Such seva in spite of the calamity!” Swamishri remarked.
“No one else could ever have done this!”
“Only one powerful enough to give would have the courage
to ask at such a time,” Ashabhai replied, choked with emotion.
“How could I ever let such an opportunity pass?”
Everyone present stood marvelling at Ashabhai’s words, for
they provided a rare example of pure faith and seva.
c c c

Ashabhai’s eldest son, Desai, had come of age. Despite
Ashabhai’s repeated requests, Swamishri had refused to let
Desai get married.
Once, while working in the pasture, Desai was bitten by
a snake. Fearing the worst, some ran to seek medical aid.
Meanwhile, Ashabhai told everyone who present to chant the
76 | Satsang Reader 1

Swaminarayan dhun. Yet, the snakebite’s effects were too severe.
and Desai soon passed away.
Losing his son was a blow Ashabhai simply could not bear.
Although he consoled others, he was in deep grief himself.
However, 15 days after Desai had died, Ashabhai was once
lying in bed at night, lost in deep thought. Suddenly, Desai
appeared before him. Ashabhai was taken aback, for he knew
for sure that he was not dreaming.
“Jay Swaminarayan,” Desai said.
“How is it that you are here?” Ashabhai asked.
“Bhagatji Maharaj is here with me,” Desai replied.
Ashabhai turned, and saw Bhagatji Maharaj before him.
As Bhagatji looked at him, Ashabhai experienced inner peace.
Bhagatji then spoke about Shastriji Maharaj’s greatness and
told him to earn Shastriji Maharaj’s grace before disappearing.
Ashabhai had always had boundless love for Swamishri. This
incident, however, strengthened that love, while at the same
time driving away the grief of having lost his son.
c c c

Day by day, satsang began taking greater importance in
Ashabhai’s life. He and his family were always ready to help
when it came to celebrating festivals. He would also always be
with Shastriji Maharaj during his vicharan in Gujarat (Charotar).
Ashabhai, Ishwarbhai, Motibhai and their families were at
the forefront in arranging Shastriji Maharaj’s 80th birthday
celebrations in Bochasan in 1945 and the Suvarna Mahotsav,
his 85th birthday celebrations in Atladara in 1949.
Moreover, it was to fulfil Ashabhai and Ishwarbhai’s wish
that Shastriji Maharaj decided to build the Gadhada mandir
entirely out of marble. Swamishri, in turn, now that the brothers
were out of debt and financially sound, told them that they were
as wealthy as the businessmen of Mumbai, and so completing
the mandir would be their responsibility. With this instruction
Swami Yagnapriyadasji | 77

from Swamishri, the two brothers took up the enormous task
of completing the mandir.
c c c

After Shastriji Maharaj passed away in 1951, the responsibility
of the Sanstha fell upon Yogiji Maharaj. Ashabhai had served
for the cause of Satsang his entire life as a householder, earning
Shastriji Maharaj’s inner blessings. However, his boundless
sentiment towards Shastriji Maharaj’s Sanstha and the Satsang
fellowship inspired him with an extraordinary wish that led him
to make the most momentous decision of his life.
During his entire life as a householder, he had suffered much
and had overcome many obstacles. Now, he was wealthy and
comfortable. He controlled vast amounts of land and his family
was expanding, as his children began having children of their
own. Naturally, towards the end of one’s life, a person wishes
to relax, enjoy and stay away from hardship. At such a time
when Ashabhai should have been enjoying the fruits of his life’s
labour, he, however, decided to take the path of hardship, one of
constant physical and mental challenges. He decided to pursue
the life of an ascetic, rejuvenating the tradition of the Purans
and Itihas shastras, in which great kings often renounced their
kingdoms. Ashabhai’s renunciation, however, stood out, for it
was aimed at pleasing his guru only.
Soon after Shastriji Maharaj passed away to Akshardham,
Ashabhai, at the age of 70, took bhagvati diksha at the hands of
Yogiji Maharaj. He was named ‘Sadhu Yagnapriyadas’. However,
as he had taken initiation at such a late age, he soon became
affectionately known as ‘Mota Swami’.
After initiation, Mota Swami engaged in vicharan with Yogiji
Maharaj and also supported him in the numerous tasks that had
been assigned to Yogiji Maharaj by Shastriji Maharaj.
Having stayed with Shastriji Maharaj, Mota Swami had
heard countless discourses relating the history and philosophy
78 | Satsang Reader 1

of Satsang. Now that he was a sadhu, he opened his stock of
knowledge before the devotees, pleasing thousands of them with
his discourses. He also went to East Africa with Yogiji Maharaj
in 1955. In his later years, he persevered in putting the finishing
touches to Atladara mandir, constructing an assembly hall, a
dining hall, a grand gate and golden sinhasans for Thakorji,
and completing the shikhars. During the final years of his life,
he blessed all with his darshan while attending both Shastriji
Maharaj’s Shatabdi Mahotsav and Yogiji Maharaj’s Amrut
Mahotsav.
Having served the Sanstha continuously for 17 years as a
sadhu, Mota Swami passed away to Akshardham in 1967. It
was as if his work on earth were complete. Truly, the story of
his sacrifice left everyone believing that he was the very form
of Rantidev, the king who had sacrificed his all in the service
of others.

Swami Yagnapriyadasji | 79

Glossary
abhishek a ritual offering in respect and reverence
atma the pure jiva distinct from the physical, subtle and causal
bodies – i.e., distinct from the indriyas, the antahkaran, worldly
desires, or any other traces of maya
arti Hindu ritual of waving lighted wicks before the murti of
God as an act of worship
atmarup one who has realized one’s true self as the atma
bawa ascetic
berkho a small rosary made of large beads
bhagvati diksha initiation into the sadhu-fold
bilipatra leaves of tree (Aeagle marmelos) sacred to Shiv
brahmacharya eight-fold celibacy and being immersed in
Parabrahma
brahmarup possessing qualities similar to those of Brahma
or Aksharbrahma
chandlo auspicious round mark of vermilion applied on the
forehead
chhand a musical metre
chopai a musical metre
dandvat prostration
darbar court of residence of a king or feudal ruler, traditionally
with a central courtyard surrounded by rooms with verandas
Darbar village chieftain or ruler
devas deities
dham abode
dharmashala rest home for pilgrims
dhotiyu lower garment worn by men
80 | Satsang Reader 1

dhun form of jap, i.e., chanting of the holy name of God, often
to the accompaniment of musical instruments
diksha initiation
ekadashi special religious observance of fasting performed on
the 11th day of the bright and dark halves of a lunar month
gopichandan sanctified sandalwood
gulal fragrant reddish powder used on joyous occasions
hindolo swing
janoi sacred thread
jhanjh small pair of hand cymbals
kalpavruksh magical tree possessing power to fulfil the wishes
of anyone sitting under it
kanthi a double-stranded necklace of miniature beads, usually
of wood
khatras an observance in which only food devoid of the six
types of taste – sweet, salty, bitter, sour, spicy, astringent – is
eaten
khichdi spiced boiled rice with lentil grains
kothari administrative head of mandir
kumkum vermilion powder used for applying chandlo
mala rosary
mangala arti first arti of the day, performed at sunrise
moksha liberation
mrudang type of double-sided drum. Traditional Indian
percussion instrument played to provide rhythm in the singing
of devotional songs
mukta a liberated devotee, beyond all attachments; aksharmukta
Glossary | 81

murti sacred image of God
murti-pratishtha traditional Vedic ceremony in which murtis
are consecrated in a mandir
nawab a local ruler
pagh traditional headgear
paramhansa an ascetic; the best of the four types of sannyasis
parayan series of spiritual discourses held for several days
parshad a renunciate who wears white robes
patlo a low platform
pichkari water squirter used during the fesatival of Fuldol
ponk soft, green wheat grain
pradakshina circumambulation
prasad sanctified food, blessed and consecrated by having been
offered to God
pujan act of worship, usully with some ritual
rangoli traditional design made on festive days with special
coloured powder
raas a traditional folk dance of Gujarat
Rojho a breed of horse
rotlo unleavened bread made of millet flour
sadguru senior sadhu
sampradaya religious organization where there is the
traditional transmission of knowledge through successive gurus
samskars to improve upon something; sacrament
sanjivani a special herb that rekindles life
satsangi a devotee who practices the vows of satsang
shikhar pinnacle
shikha tuft of hair
sinhasan throne for God; seat for eminent persons
sud bright half of lunar month
82 | Satsang Reader 1

sukhdi a sweet delicacy of wheat flour, ghee and gur
thuli a type of cheap grain
tilak U-shaped mark made with sandalwood paste on one’s
forehead, chest and arms
tilak-chandlo U-shaped mark made with sandalwood paste
and a round mark of kumkum in its centre applied by male
devotees; a hallmark of one’s allegiance to the Swaminarayan
Sampradaya
upasana philosophical understanding of the nature of God
vad dark half of lunar month
vairagi ascetic
vartman vow
vicharan spiritual travels
yagna ceremonial ritual performed as a form of worship to
seek the good favour and receive the blessings of the deities
yati person with great self-control

Glossary | 83

