Q.7 In the sentences below, state who is speaking to whom and when. (Total Marks: 9)
☞ Note : Who is speaking 1 mark, to whom 1 mark and when 1 mark.
1. “Where did this pepper come from?” (4/37)
➭ Jinabhai - to Adiba (sister)
➭ Adiba refused to give pepper when Kamalshibhai was having headache by saying
we don’t have it in house but after some days she gave it to Jinabhai when he had
headache. so Jinabhai said the above statement.
2. “If you wish for liberation, take refuge in Bhagwan Swaminarayan.” (8/71)
➭ Ranchhodray - to Ashabhai
➭ Every Punam Ashabhai would go to Dakor for darshan of Ranchhodray. Here he
was saddened on seeing some instances of unrighteousness. One night,
Ranchhodray granted him darshan in dream and told above statement.
3. “Take this sukhdi and use it today to freshen your mouth.” (3/25)
➭ Shriji Maharaj - to Shukmuni
➭ Shukmuni was busy writing letter for Maharaj. He was late for the morning bath.
Everyone had already returned from their bath. He began to worry about this. He
was not able to break his previous day’s ekadashi fast without bathing and
performing his morning worship rituals. Maharaj sensed his worry and said this.
Q.8 Give reasons for the following (two to three lines each). (Total Marks: 4)
1. Ladudanji family decided to go to Gadhada. (1/5)
A. Ladudanji was deeply touched by the sisters divine words and immediately went to
Maharaj and gave up his rich clothes and ornaments. He then asked Maharaj to
make him a sadhu. Maharaj initiated him into the sadhufold. When Ladudanji’s family
knew about what Ladudanji had done they came to Gadhada to persuade him to
return home.
2. Jetha Bhagat wore saffron clothes. (7/61)
A. Nobody ever had the courage to tell Jetha Bhagat to wear saffron but Shastriji Maharaj
told him that his intellect, knowledge and ability will shine only when he accept the
saffron robes but not in white. This words stuck in Jetha Bhagat’s mind and soon he
took initiation.

The scriptural debate with Khaiyo Khatri
Shriji Maharaj once went to Kutch along with his sadhu and devotees. In Mandvi there
lived a great learned scholar of vedant by the name of Khaiyo Khatri. When he learnt of
Maharaj’s arrival in town he challenged Maharaj to a scriptural debate. Realizing the
scholar’s intention Maharaj devised a plan. Turning to Brahmanand Swami, he said,
“When Khaiyo Khatri arrives for the debate, you sit in my place, and I shall sit on the
ground nearby. When he asks you questions, point to me and tell him, “This disciple of
mine will answer all your questions.” Brahmanand Swami hesitated, for Maharaj was
asking him to play the role of God. Yet, he was helpless in the face of Maharaj’s
command. When Khaiyo Khatri and his disciple arrived his eyes fell on Brahmanand
Swami seated on Maharaj’s seat. Taking Brahmanand Swami to be Bhagwan
Swaminarayan himself, Khaiyo began asking him questions. “This disciple of mine will
reply,” Brahmanand Swami said pointing towards Maharaj. Maharaj gave clear and
logical replies to each of Khaiyo’s questions. His unfailing answers left the scholar taken
aback and wondering which of the two was the real Swaminarayan. Khaiyo’s mother,
sitting afar, quelled his doubt. “Look, my son,” she said “This younger sadhu sitting on
the ground is God. The sadhu sitting on the seat is a fake!” Brahmanand Swami at once
got up and had Maharaj sit on the high seat. He himself sat on the ground. Khaiyo’s
misconceptions about Maharaj was cleared. Once a critic Khaiyo now became a
devotee.
Q.10 Answer ALL of the following, using one sentence (not just one word) for
each answer. (Total Marks: 4)
☞ Note: No mark for incomplete answer.
1. What did Abhel Khachar tell Jivuba when he barged into the room with a sword? (6/49)
A. When Abhel Khachar barged into Jivuba’s room he said you act like such a great
devotee yet you’ve blemished the family name! You’re hiding a bawa in the darbar!
Where is he? Speak up!”
2. At whose house did Shriji Maharaj sit on the yoke of the cart and eat milk and thuli? (2/18)
A. At Raya Khatan’s house Shriji Maharaj ate milk and thuli a preparation of wheat flakes
while sitting on the yoke of the cart.
3. What were the names of Joban Pagi’s brothers? (3/42)
A. Joban Pagi’s brothers names were Sundar Pagi, Shakaro Pagi and Dalo Pagi.
4. In his last moments, what did Nirgun Swami pray for to Shastriji Maharaj? (7/67)
A. Nirgun Swami prayed to Swamishri “Please forgive me if I have done anything wrong
or if I have ever not been able to act according to your wishes. Now take me to
Akshardham.”

SECTION-2: SATSANG READER PART-I, 6th Edition April - 2011)
Q.7 In the sentences below, state who is speaking to whom and when. (Total Marks: 9)
☞ Note : Who is speaking 1 mark, to whom 1 mark and when 1 mark.
1. “Bhagwan Purushottam Narayan himself will come to your village.” (2/17)
➭ Lord Shivji - to Devidanji
➭ When Devidan’s father had gone out, Devidan continued his father’s daily routine. He
sat before the murti of Shivji, feelings of devotion and an inner desire, to please Shivji
poured from the innocent heart. He devoutly offered abhishek and bilipatra to the
murti and fixed his gaze on Shivji, yearing to meet him. Shivji appeared before him,
granting him darshan and a boon and said the above words.
2. “Gunatitanand Swami’s greatness is not due to the seat. He is eternally great.” (3/27)
➭ Maharaj - to Shukmuni or Shukanand Swami
➭ Gunatitanand Swami had come to Akshar ordi for Maharaj’s darshan. Seeing him
enter, Shukmuni scrambled to find a sit for him.
3. “Please forgive me if I have ever done anything wrong or if I have ever not been
able to act according to your wishes.” (7/67)
➭ Nirgundas Swami - Shastriji Maharaj
➭ As Nirgundas Swami fell ill, he was brought to Mumbai for treatment. Yet his illness
and the resulting weakness he suffered left him feeling uneasy. so he said the
above words.
Q.8 Give reasons for the following (two to three lines each). (Total Marks: 4)
1. On seeing Jivuba returning home, Abhel Khachar was left speechless. (6/52)
A. On seeing his daughter return home, Abhel Khachar was furious. Flushed with rage,
he came to beat her, but was silenced when he saw the permission letter in her
hands.
2. Ranchhodray granted darshan to Ashabhai in a dream. (8/71)
A. Every punam Ashabhai would go to Dakor for the darshan of Ranchhodray. Here, he
was saddened on seeing some instances of unrighteousness. One night,
Ranchhodray granted him darshan in a dream and said “If you wish for your liberation,
take refuge in Bhagwan Swaminarayan. At present, he is manifest and moves about
within Satsang.
Q.9 Write short notes on 'Transformation of Jobanpagi' (5/42-43) (in 15 lines). (Total
Marks: 5)
Jobanpagi was such a terror in Gujarat that not even kings dared to utter his name. He
roamed 100 kms committing crimes, even in broad daylight yet nobody could catch him.
Maharaj had previously granted Jobanpagi darshan in Vartal as the yogi Nilkanth Varni,
yet Jobanpagi had forgotten Maharaj due to the stark evil that had enwrapped his mind.
Maharaj came to Vartal after many years along with his ‘Rojho’ (horse) at Bapujibhai’s
home. He went to Bapujibhai’s enclave to test Maharaj’s godhood and steal the horse.
But when he tried, Raiji boomed and said what will do you when Swaminarayan is in
another village? Joban turned back disappointed. After few years Maharaj organized a
grand yagna at Dabhan. Swift horses kathi darbar and Maharaj’s Rojho were tied at the
village outskirts. Joban was tempted, “If I had such horse, I could cover many
kilometres in a single night. Looting would be much easier. He entered the stable in a
dark night. But as he went to untie the horse, he saw circles of light coming from
somewhere. He saw Bhagwan Swaminarayan in Gold-threaded clothes. Joban jerked
his hands back from the horse, shocked. Stepping back he retreated and disappeared
into the darkness. Thousands of devotees eyes were focused on Maharaj’s murti. An
unknown edgy looking man soon entered. He jumped onto the stage and fell at
Maharaj’s feet. He began crying profusely, washing Maharaj’s feet with his tears. He
said “Oh Lord, I am crooked worthless and foolish. I was unable to recognize you for
who are you. Oh compassionate one! please have pity on me. Please free me from my
- 5 -
Pravesh-1
sins. Maharaj forgave him for his misdeeds and had him take the vows of satsang.
Samvat 1866 of posh, Jobanpagi left everything and became Maharaj’s bodyguard.
Q.10 Answer ALL of the following, using one sentence (not just one word) for
each answer. (Total Marks: 4)
☞ Note : mark of right half answer not to be given.
1. How did Jivuba explain the futility on the world and its affairs through religion to
Ladu Barot? (6/55)
A. Jivuba explained Ladu Barot that the body is nothing but a container full of rotting
waste, nothing worth being attracted towards.
2. What blessings did Shukmuni give to Dungarbhai when he gave him vartman?(6/28)
A. Shukmuni said to Dhoribhai, “This child will do great work for satsang and will spread
Maharaj’s true upasana.
3. What was Jhinabhai’s reply when Shriji Maharaj asked, “Which Dham do you wish
to go to?” (6/39)
A. Jhinabhai replied, “Please keep me forever in your service just as you have kept
Bhaguji, Miyaji and Mulji Brahmachari.
4. Who initiated Ashabhai and what was he named? (8/78)
A. Yogiji Maharaj gave diksha to Ashabhai and named him ‘Yagnapriyadas.’
Q.11 Select the six correct sentences from below and write them in the correct
story sequence in the boxes. (Total Marks: 6)
Topic: Ladudanji’s four wishes (1/1-6)
☞ Note: (1) Correct sentence numbers: Answer is written in any serial numbers
form but all numbers are correct then you given full 3 marks otherwise no marks
will be given. (2) Correct sequence of sentences: Sequence of sentence
numbers is written as answersheet then you given correct 3 marks otherwise no
marks will be given.
Q.12 Rewrite the incorrect sentences below in relation to the sentence heading.
(Total Marks: 4)
☞ Note: Marks will be awarded only if a sentence is written complete correctly.
Otherwise no marks will be awarded.
1. Swami Yagnapriyadasji : Being with him settled his qualms and convinced him that,
through Swamishri, he had attained moksha. He bowed his head before Swamishri’s
lotus feet. (8/72)
2. Bhaktaraj Jivuba : Jivuba happened to have a clay pot and some extra clothes with her.
Thinking quickly, she had Maharaj dress as a shepherdess and give him her pot to
complete the costume. Amongst a group of similarly dressed women, Maharaj entered
the darbar, unnoticed. (6/53)
3. Sadguru Brahmanand Swami : Born on Vasant Panchmi, Samvat 1828, in the village
of Khan in the Shirohi region. Here, he stayed as a guest of the Rao, of Kutch. (1/1)
4. Sadguru Shukanand Swami: Immediately understanding Maharaj’s wish, Dada
Khachar called a carpenter to cut some wood. Dada Khachar then broke open a clay pot
and lit a fire in it from the wood. He brought the fire before Maharaj. (3/26)
Write the correct
sentence numbers
Correct sequence
of sentences
(1)
(2)
Note: (1) 3 marks will be awarded
in the correct sentence number
only if all the six sentence numbers are correct and (2) 3 marks
will be awarded only if all the
sequence of sentence numbers is
correct. Otherwise no marks will
be given.
3 5 7 9 11 12
7 9 3 5 12 11
- 6 -
Pravesh-1
(SECTION-3: ESSAY)
Q.13 Write an essay on any ONE of the following. (in approximately 30 lines.)
(Total Marks: 10)
☞ Note : Essay is an independent original subject. The following points plus
